Anglers, game shooting enthusiasts and bowls clubs are increasing the pressure for the lockdown to be eased for their sports, arguing that they can resume them while remaining physically distanced. Lobbyists for fishing and game shooting claim that continuing strict lockdown restrictions for their pursuits could cost the UK economy millions of pounds and lead to thousands of job losses. They also warn that the disappearance from the countryside of sportspeople during lockdown is leading to a rise in rural crime and having a negative impact on conservation. Meanwhile, greens are being lovingly prepared and committee members thinking about ways of operating in a post-lockdown world as the sport of bowls makes tentative preparations for a comeback. Martin Salter, the head of policy at the Angling Trust, said fishing had been “incredibly responsible” in persuading the UK’s many hundreds of thousands of anglers to stay away from the water during lockdown. But he said: “I think we have a compelling case now for us to be at the very front of the queue when the government and its advisers decide the time is right to begin ratcheting back the restrictions.” The Angling Trust has submitted a three-phase plan called When We Fish Again to the government spelling out how it believes fishing could return safely. Phase one would include angling being undertaken on a solitary basis close to home. The second phase suggests reintroducing charter boat and competition fishing – but only if guidelines can be followed. The final phase would involve a fuller resumption of the sport, again respecting any restrictions. The industry says fishing contributes around £4bn annually to the UK economy, supporting more than 40,000 jobs. There have been dire warnings that businesses will go under and jobs lost if the sport does not resume soon. Across the country’s waterways, there have been reports of increases in vandalism and poaching. Danny Fairbrass, whose company runs 25 lakes, said: “Almost every one has been vandalised or fished illegally during lockdown. With fishing safely re-introduced this would eradicate all of these issues overnight.” Meanwhile, country estates are planning to reduce the number of days they organise when the grouse, partridge and pheasant seasons begin later this year. Jon Fuller, the head keeper at an estate in Shropshire that runs pheasant and partridge shoots in the autumn, said it was planning to press ahead with 60% of its normal activities. “It’s very uncertain times.” he said. “I’m optimistic that we will be able to do some shooting but we can’t say for certain how much. We’ve got to scale back a bit.” Like the Angling Trust, the British Association for Shooting and Conservation (BASC) is drawing up plans for how game shoots later this year can be carried out if physical distancing rules remain in place. BASC says that shooting contributes £2bn into the UK economy annually and provides the equivalent of 74,000 full-time jobs. In the world of bowls, many players and some administrators are arguing that the nature of their sport means the comforting clack of bowl on bowl may be heard in sunlit parks by mid-summer. “We tick the box for non-contact and we play outdoors,” said Alistair Hollis, the operational services manager at Bowls England. “With a degree of initiative and innovation, social distancing shouldn’t be too much of a problem.” In normal times as many as 48 people routinely play on one green but Hollis said the number would almost certainly have to be severely restricted with perhaps just one-on-one or pair games played rather than team versions. Appointment systems and time restrictions may have to be introduced and rules on not sharing equipment brought in. “One of our biggest selling points is that we are a family sport that can be played by all ages together,” said Hollis. “If the same households are allowed to play something together, our sport may fit the bill. A game of bowls in the middle of July with our family might be an attractive proposition.” Craig McGuigan, the chairman of the British Parks Crown Green Bowling Association, acknowledges that there are possible hitches. “The sport is non-contact but people do usually handle things like the jack, the mat. We may have to look at ways of making sure we can wash equipment. We need to find ways of looking after one another.” No bowls is currently being played in the UK. Mark Bircumshaw, chief executive of the British Crown Green Bowling Association, was more cautious about the prospect of a return soon. “We are following government guidance. I don’t expect much broadening of what we can do after Sunday,” he said. Bircumshaw pointed out that many bowls players were over 70. “We have to do the right thing for our elderly population,” he added. The Isle of Man might lead the bowls comeback in the British Isles. Its governing body has written to its government setting out proposals for how it could return. It is confident that a bowls festival in September that attracts hundreds of bowlers from across the UK will go ahead. Richard Potton, captain of Newport Pagnell bowls club in Buckinghamshire, said its greens had been kept in tip-top condition. “We’ve been looking after them during lockdown,” he said. “I believe we’ll be back by mid-July. If the professional footballers are being allowed to play, why shouldn’t we? We can’t wait to get back.”