As a Guardian reader for 50 years, I usually enjoy your columnists’ writing. But I find myself unusually miffed by Zoe Williams’ rant about golfers (“golf courses … are for rich people ... for men … people who play golf are those who crave human warmth the least”). My experience is that golf clubs have among their members and guests a significant number of women and a wide range of occupations. As to the ridiculous comment about “human warmth”, as a retired psychologist I think I am better qualified than Zoe when I say that this is just a lazy stereotype. Surely it is obvious that golf courses and tennis courts were opened early as we exit lockdown because these games can be played while maintaining social distancing.Charlie MatthewsPershore, Worcestershire • Zoe Williams says that those who play golf (mainly older men) “should have been accommodated last”. The opposite is the case. Men are twice as likely to die of Covid-19 as women and death rates are highest among the old. Fresh air and exercise are proven to help resistance. Men are the most vulnerable to the crushing psychological pressures of this crisis. They are three times more likely to kill themselves, and the highest suicide rates are among middle-aged men. Sport and companionship are proven to increase mental wellbeing. This may have looked like a catchy line to highlight, but it is heartless and sexist and plain wrong. Would you have even contemplated making such outrageous and false generalisations about any other group in society?Nigel AllenStockport • So, golf, the game I took up when I retired as a schoolteacher, is for rich people? My membership works out at £12 a week. Some people pay that for three or four coffees a week. A game for men? Yes, the majority of players are men, but women’s golf is alive and (relatively) well. And “people who play golf are those who crave human warmth the least”? What an insult to the thousands of ordinary – yes, ordinary – people you can meet in golf clubs all over Britain! Lockdown must have interfered with Ms Williams’ common sense. Or she has had an unhappy encounter with a rich male golfer. Twenty years ago I stood on the first tee ready to play my first competitive match at another club. Ahead of us on the fairway were two women. One of our opponents said: “The woman on the left is 89 and the other is 93.” And I thought: this is the game for me!Olive SpicerGlasgow