“I have honestly never been more proud to be a nurse,” Jade Thorne, 29, a senior diabetes specialist nurse, said after spending the most traumatic few weeks of her life tending to Covid-19 patients in two London hospitals. Her last shift at the Nightingale hospital was on 4 May. Nursing, for her, was always a vocation: “I have never, ever, wanted to do anything else.” There’s a family photograph (left) of the aspirant nurse, aged four, playing at caring for her mother, Tracey, a hairdresser. The picture was taken in Ensbury Park, a Bournemouth suburb where Thorne spent her formative years. Moving to London in 2016, she worked first at Charing Cross hospital before settling in at West Middlesex university hospital (West Mid). Everything changed on 27 March when Thorne answered the call to attend an intensive care orientation day. Akin to wartime expediency, nurses were needed to support the expanding intensive care unit (ICU). “I wasn’t scared of coronavirus,” she said, but was apprehensive as to how she might be effective as “a fish out of water” in the ICU. Her first shift, on 1 April, was “horrific”. “I watched someone die on a ventilator … the man was the same age as my dad.” Thorne tried to stay near him, by the window, so that he wouldn’t be alone at the end. It is the nurses’ role to conduct the “last offices”: to wash and prepare the bodies, place them in a shroud and remove any jewellery. When the patient died, she recalls, “I remember removing his wedding ring to give back to his family and it absolutely broke my heart. Tears were running all over my face. I remember telling myself to be strong … I thought how it would feel to receive that ring, but not the patient.” She did witness a patient successfully transition off a ventilator on her last shift at the Nightingale hospital at London’s ExCeL centre. The patient was under light sedation. Thorne played Gujarati chants from a computer, then shouted out the one Gujarati phrase she knew: “Kem cho? Majama?” (roughly: “How are you, all fine?”). The man opened his eyes. Subsequently, his condition improved and he could be extubated, the result of a team effort, where, during the Covid crisis, nurses have come together. “We have been brave and tried to adapt our profession, supporting and teaching each other to get through this … we’d look into each other’s eyes to give each other strength.” Earlier, at West Mid, when a patient awoke while under sedation, he signalled for a pen. On a paper towel he wrote: “Please call my wife and tell her I’m OK.” On another day, passing the nurses’ station, Thorne took a phone call. It was the son of a patient on CPap (continuous positive airway pressure device) about to be put on a ventilator. “Just tell my dad that I love him,” the son asked. That was the last family message the patient heard. We’d look into each other’s eyes to give each other strength. I first met the nurse a few days after she finished at the Nightingale. “I’ve hit a bit of a wall,” she told me. Off “the treadmill” of twelve-and-a-half hour shifts she described replaying her time in the ICU. “My heart just feels very heavy now.” Painting by numbers and gardening help to lighten her sorrow. Although many health workers are used to seeing death, Dr Andrew Molodynski, mental health lead for the British Medical Association and a consultant psychiatrist, told BBC news: “We aren’t used to seeing lots of people die when we can’t do anything about it.” Teresa Uithaler, 27, a nursing sister from South Africa, was drafted into the West Mid ICU from A&E on 3 April, where she shared shifts with Thorne. Unable to return to her home in Lewisham (her boyfriend is asthmatic) Teresa has been lodging in a local hotel, subsisting on room-service hamburgers and beef stew. It’s a boxed-in world at “home” and work. For a week she woke up spontaneously each morning at 4am. It was at 4am that her patient for three weeks, Melvin Gwanzura, a 43-year-old teacher, died on 23 April. “We were never prepared to see young people actually dying of it [Covid] despite trying everything,” Teresa admits. “I would talk to him. I would sing to him. I was really willing for him to be OK. You’ve got so many people who love you, I would tell him.” Recalling the worst moments of her nursing career, when she witnessed his seizures, she says: “I have never felt so helpless.” “Writing poetry is cathartic,” claims Rima Sinha, 28, an Indian ICU doctor who speaks Punjabi and Hindi. She was so moved by the death of one patient at 5am on 21 April that she wrote a grief poem about her. Rima spoke to and reassured the confused elderly patient in Hindi, which helped at first, but she died after two weeks in the ICU. Rima’s poem describes the unforgettable imprint of a patient’s passing: “The face floods/wrestling into my thoughts,” and ends: It seemed inevitable as often is,In these circumstances where some live,But many don’t and we shouldn’t despair,Yet when she died my heart that hoped,Lost another fight.” Fighting Covid has been, and will continue to be, a physical and mental battle for patients, doctors and nurses; one in which, as Teresa underlines, “you can never celebrate too early”. While the peak may be past in hospitals, the summit of psychological trauma, for many, is still wrapped in cloud.