Tinned food has a best-before date of about three years, but is still likely to be good to eat decades later, making it an invaluable back-up. It also helps you prevent food waste by letting you be more sparing with perishable purchases – though, as with fresh food, it’s a good idea to rotate the cans in your cupboard, bringing short-date items to the fore, so you can build them into the week’s meals. As well as helping to reduce food waste, tinned food is a good choice compared with other packaged food, because cans are made from a relatively low-impact material that actually gets recycled, unlike most plastics and Tetrapak. It’s also worth noting that, no matter how new it is, if a tin has a dent or is rusty, it is safest to compost the contents to avoid the deadly bacteria Clostridium botulinum. I’ve usually got a reliable stack of tinned lentils, beans and tomatoes, and today’s dish is a mixture of these stalwarts, made into a super-quick dal. If you have any fresh vegetables that need using up, add them finely diced at the same time as the onion. Tinned food is undeservedly often forgotten about and wrongly labelled as poor-quality, low in nutrition and tasteless. Tinned foods do lose a small amount of their nutrition, but for the added economical, time- and waste-saving benefits, I believe they should be store-cupboard staples in every home. This dal is as simple as can be and takes just five minutes to make from just a few ingredients. Serves 4 1 tbsp oil1 onion, peeled and finely chopped2 tbsp garam masala150g frozen or canned spinach1 x 400g can green or brown lentils1 x 400g can beans – kidney, black or other1 x 400g can chopped tomatoesTo serveRice4 sprigs coriander, leaves picked, stalks finely chopped (optional)4 tbsp yoghurt, (optional) Heat the oil in a saucepan, add the onion and garam masala, and saute for two minutes. Add the spinach, tomatoes, lentils and beans, including their liquid, swill all the cans clean with a splash of water each and add that to the pot, too. Bring the mix up to a boil, stirring all the while, then serve with rice, topped with a blob of yoghurt and coriander, if you wish.