Whenever I visit my parents, I bring them a jar of jam. It’s taken until now (we are staying with them) to realise that they eat only marmalade, so we have an accidental stockpile. A convenient one, too; as we’re shopping less frequently, our fresh fruit supply is limited, and jam makes a good – if rather sweet – substitute. Used sparingly, and mixed with a little lemon juice, jam steps in for cooked fruit in bakes, breakfasts, pancakes, puddings and as a sidekick for cheese. This layer cake takes the best bits from a victoria sponge and a lemon drizzle, while these five quick ideas for new ways to use the jam in the cupboard. This is easy as anything: egg-free cake is made from things that I expect most of you have in your cupboards. I’ve tried to keep the recipe as flexible as possible, so use whichever sugar, flour, jam and citrus you have around. You will need two 20cm round cake tins. Prep 10 minCook 45 minMakes 8-10 slices 350g plain or spelt flour250g sugar (caster is best, granulated or light brown also work)2 tsp baking powderA pinch of salt350ml milk of your choice (I used oat)120ml flavourless oil (such as vegetable, sunflower, light olive, coconut)2 unwaxed lemons or limes, zested and juiced (about 8 tbsp) For the yoghurt-jam filling4 tbsp thick yoghurt (thick coconut or Greek) or cream cheese4 tbsp icing sugar4 tbsp jam of your choice (I used apricot) For the drizzle syrup2 tbsp sugar Grease both cake tins and line the base with discs of baking paper. If you don’t have baking paper, grease the tin, add a tablespoon of sugar, then tip the tin and shake it around to cover the surface, shaking off any excess. Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4. In a large bowl, mix the flour, sugar, baking powder and salt with a whisk. In another bowl, whisk the milk, oil and half the citrus juice. Add the wet ingredients to the dry and mix well with a wooden spoon. Add the zest from the citrus fruit. Beat well, until the ingredients are thoroughly combined and the mixture is smooth. Spoon the cake mix evenly between the lined tins, spread to level it out with the back of a spoon, and bake on the middle shelf of the oven for 30-40 minutes. Transfer to a rack and leave to cool completely before removing from the tin. Meanwhile, make the drizzle syrup, combining three tablespoons of the remaining juice with the sugar, then carefully and evenly spoon it over the top of just one of the cakes – this will be the topping. Once the cakes are cool, make the filling. Combine the yoghurt and icing sugar, and mix the jam with a tablespoon of lemon juice. Put the bottom cake on a plate, spread over the filling, dot with the jam, then make sandwich with the sugared cake on top. Let it down with lemon, orange or lime juice for a spoonable compote to top your morning granola or porridge if you have run out of fresh fruit. My friend, the food writer Georgie Hayden, rightly points out that apricot jam is a perfect pairing for halloumi. Warm it with a little lemon juice and spread it on top of crisp, fried or grilled halloumi. Goat’s cheese, feta and soft, rinded cheese such as brie make a great partner for some jams – sharper ones, such as blackcurrant or blackberry, work best. Any jam warmed in a pan with a little citrus juice or water makes a great quick topping for most pancakes and puddings. Sandwich a cake, as in today’s first recipe, or some cookies with it – or bake it into these delicious crumble bars.