I am wondering how to deal with a matter within the current lockdown measures. My mother, 94 and disabled, needs her hair washing. Both my parents live in their own home; I think, strictly speaking, I am allowed to see only one, outside, from two metres away. As it is a warm day, would the government suggest she finds a chair that I set out for her and waits, while from the right distance, I throw a bucket of water, she tries to apply shampoo, then I lather with a broom, repeat, then toss her a towel? Wait until dry, then say goodbye, and wait for my father, 93, to appear, and I have a brief chat, from a distance, with him? This seems an odd way to treat an elderly couple who never go out, the same way I don’t either. I can’t find any other way of seeing them, but find this rule extraordinary. I hope her birthday will be a warm day. At that age one feels the cold.Beverley RawNewton Poppleford, Devon • I truly don’t understand the rules. My wife, Jane, and I are people in a household. So we can meet our daughter who is a person from another household (at a safe distance, natch). But my daughter, who is also a person in a household, cannot meet both of us because we are more than one person. Further, I imagine that Jane will be able to meet my daughter, while I, on a different park bench, will be able to meet my granddaughter, all at two metres apart. But will I be able to talk to my daughter, because we aren’t at the same meeting?David WolfsonStony Stratford, Milton Keynes • More and more absurd rules are being introduced. I have two friends who are brothers, and both have takeaway shops. They each have one daughter and are working in their takeaway shops with their wives and four other strangers from the beginning of the lockdown. Brothers, wives and daughters are not seeing each other for two months, yet are working with strangers every day, seven days a week in a one metre by one metre kitchen. Where is the logic? Where is the sense? Edik OhandjanianHandforth, Cheshire