The world I grew up in was always circumscribed by war: I was five years old when it began, and it was all I knew. There were lots of rules. The world was black – no chinks of light from curtains, or someone would come knocking; no street lights, shop windows, tiny hand torches to find your way. Just total blackness, so the bombers wouldn’t see. They came anyway, lighting up the sky as our nearest city, Manchester, burned. We would huddle safe in our underground shelter, grabbed from my bed in the dark by my father, nestled among soil and spiders. As I grew older we played hiding from Germans in the wheatfields, and swapped pieces of fallen shrapnel. We were aware of mysterious worried chatter among the grownups. My father’s Home Guard rifle stood in the hall. Then suddenly, in May 1945, there was this explosion of light: brightness was everywhere. And excitement, laughter, joy. Everything was allowed. “It” was over. Even our teachers relaxed, laughing too. The great deadly cloud of threat lifted. We knew from the song that, “Somewhere over the rainbow skies are blue, and the dreams that you dare to dream really do come true”. And they had. It was our Over the Rainbow moment. From my village, Hazel Grove, south of industrial, smoky Stockport, the clanging tram would take me to school and back every day. But VE Day was different: a corporation tram was decked out with lights on every surface, glittering like Cinderella’s coach. As the evening darkened it came rattling down the track, through cheering crowds. At the terminal we were all gathered: families, shopkeepers, teachers, doctors. Even the vicar. For the first time I was allowed to gallivant off with friends. Suddenly all the young people joined hands, circling the now stationary tram, and skipped and danced round it into the night. Yes, the world would never be the same again: a future without war, without bombing, rationing, fear, damage, death. Today, 75 years later, I ask myself: will it be like this when the coronavirus is defeated? Our release, when it comes, will be slow, conducted out of sight by scientists, measured and sometimes clumsy. But though we can’t expect that instant euphoria, there are larger parallels. The war taught us many things: fellow feeling, shared values, resourcefulness. People grew their own fruit and veg, kept chickens. Of course, there was a black market; petty crime increased, and the rich dined at the Dorchester. The rest of us took our ration books when we went on holiday. But we knew it would end, and the world would be changed. Above all, we appreciated the power of the state to organise for the benefit of everyone: even the royal family was said to limit their bath water to 5 inches deep – a requirement instinctively obeyed by us all, even if unpoliced. A vast infrastructure of recruitment, to the services and factories, the commandeering of transport on roads and ports, was all part of the war effort. “Don’t you know there’s a war on?” was a good-humoured response to anyone complaining. But something else was afoot. The years before the war had seen the Great Depression and suffering among working people. Today we acknowledge the damage the recent years of austerity did to the lives of the poorest, and in that sense to us all. With both the war and the pandemic has come the resolve, hardly formulated today but widely shared, that we can’t go back to the old ways. There is a drive to make things better. During the war, improvements were already being mapped out: in 1942, William Beveridge (a Liberal) published a report attacking what he called the five giants: idleness, ignorance, disease, squalor and want. He first used the phrase “from cradle to grave” to describe universal provision, and his study would be a blueprint for the postwar welfare state. In 1944 Rab Butler ( a Tory) saw through the Education Act, which completely transformed schooling in Britain by abolishing fees for all state secondary education. It also introduced the 11-plus exam, splitting educational options: I, the granddaughter of factory workers, passed, and went to a grammar school. This was all happening even as we battled the enemy in the Mediterranean and Normandy. It was based on creating a more equitable society, and there was a wide consensus this should be so. It translated into a Tory defeat in the 1945 general election. Churchill was shocked: hadn’t he won the war for us? But change was pressing forward. Will change on a similar scale come to us in the coming years? Who is doing the planning right now? Who is setting out the blueprint for a fairer society? The ever growing disparity of wealth – between individuals, between countries – is probably the major blight of our present world order. It is, like Covid-19, a global issue. In confronting the one, as we already are doing, we could also seize the chance to confront the other. It is an opportunity that may not come again. • Joan Bakewell is a broadcaster, writer and Labour peer 