Lauren Cuthbertson was on her way home after performing in St Petersburg when an email brought her life to a screeching halt. “I was on the Gatwick Express and I got the email saying there’ll be no classes and no rehearsals,” says the Royal Ballet principal ballerina. “It said very clearly, ‘Don’t come to the theatre.’” That was the moment Covid-19 disrupted Cuthbertson’s carefully laid plans, and upturned her routine of intense daily practice and character development. “As a dancer, you always know the dates for your shows,” she says from her new base in the Midlands. “I barely know what date it is now.” The impact of Covid-19 on dance has seen schedules torn up, dates in disarray, practices on hiatus. Freelance dancers, who make up the majority in the industry, have no work and are looking to the government for support. Theatres and companies had to deal with the fallout from cancelled shows, which were often booked 18 months to two years in advance. Those cancellations took with them the funds many were relying on until the next project funding was awarded. Terry Hyde, a former Royal Ballet dancer turned psychologist, says the dance world is a fraught place at the best of times, one where competition and pressure take their toll. Now he has seen a surge in people seeking his services. “It’s unrelenting pressure,” says Hyde. “Some of it is the self doing it, and some of it comes through the old-school approach that says you need to work through any pain.” Hyde says that traditional performance pressure has been replaced by anxiety about the uncertainty. “Now it’s all about fear of missing out because they’re worried and isolated,” says Hyde. “Is someone else able to work out more effectively while you’re struggling? Are they getting an edge?” Cuthbertson, who has a large social media presence, says that as the lockdown measures took effect she began to find the online world anxiety-inducing. “When I went on there, it would make me feel guilty for not doing online classes,” she says. “That was my moment of finding my feet in quarantine. I took around 10 days off ballet; I had to recalibrate what I was training for.” Recalibration is something Alexander Whitley has been doing as well. He was days away from unveiling a production that he had been working on for 18 months when lockdown meant it was cancelled. “We’d spent a week in the studio preparing for the show and then it was pulled,” says Whitley, referring to Overflow, a new work that was due to premiere at the Lowry in Salford. Overflow’s dates at Sadler’s Wells have been rescheduled for the autumn, but Whitley estimates his company has lost £100,000 because of coronavirus, a huge amount for an independent dance company of that size. “The loss of income for us made it impossible for us to pay anyone for the work we thought we were going to have heading into the autumn,” he says. Whitley is waiting to see if he will receive some of the £160m emergency response package announced by Arts Council England (ACE). “There has to be really substantial support in place in some way or the work we do is not going to happen,” he says. “It’s not going to exist.” For Eliot Smith, a dancer and choreographer based in Newcastle upon Tyne, funding is also the pressing concern. He runs an independent company that performs predominantly in the north-east and is worried that, as well as the immediate impact Covid-19 has had on cancelled performances and box office, there will be a secondary financial hit. At the moment applicants for ACE project grants have to demonstrate that a minimum of 10% of the overall budget has been supplied by other sources. Smith says much of his so-called “match funding” comes from local authorities who are now diverting funding to tackle Covid-19. “Some of our grants will not be released because they’re going to be used for wellbeing issues and not the arts,” says Smith. “What impact will that have on us when we go to ACE and don’t have that match funding?” Equity, the union that represents dancers, said the outlook for the sector is “bleak”, adding that if theatre recovery is delayed beyond the beginning of September, which many have predicted, the sector will require additional help to make up for lost income. The industry body, One Dance UK, praised ACE’s initial response but told the Guardian it backs the creation of a Creative Industries Distress Fund that would be available well into the recovery period. Whatever the ultimate response is, Smith, Cuthbertson and Whitley all believe that dance will not be the same. Smith and Whitley have both started creating work that has been choreographed specifically for online performances, while there have been some unlikely positives for Cuthbertson (who can be seen in the Royal Ballet’s Winter’s Tale stream this month). She was a cross-country champion at school and is being encouraged to run again, an activity that is usually banned for dancers whose ankles don’t need any additional burden. The ballerina is trying to find joy in that, dancing to unorthodox music (mostly Philip Glass and Elton John) and practices with her colleagues held online. “You can have an amazing Zoom class, but my wifi connection isn’t great, so I end up missing half of the moves,” says Cuthbertson. “Doing what you can with restrictions can be fulfilling though,” she adds. “It gets frustrating when you compare it to what you’re used to – but that’s not the situation we’ve got now.”