The choreographer and dancer Hofesh Shechter was born in Jerusalem in 1975 and studied at the city’s Academy for Dance and Music. He moved to London in 2002 and won the 2004 Place Prize’s audience award for his sextet Cult. In 2008 he founded the Hofesh Shechter Company, and made his Royal Ballet debut in 2015 with Untouchable. He was awarded an OBE in 2018. Shechter’s new productions, Double Murder and Political Mother Unplugged, will tour the UK and Europe later this year. #SaatchiTakeover The Saatchi Gallery is posting a new theme every week on its social media platforms and anyone can respond by sending their art, which, if chosen, is presented online. It’s an eclectic, surprising and ever-changing spring of new art by new artists. I love that our situation weirdly gives birth to being exposed to more, and unpredictable, artistic content. Being a member of such an unpredictable art form as contemporary dance, I’m a fan of mixed bags. Surprises are healthy. If you have a strong heart. Unorthodox (Netflix) This mini-series is a surprisingly realistic depiction of Jewish Orthodox life. A powerful piece. It took me way back to my childhood in Jerusalem, where I witnessed close and far family members, either within, or brushing close to, the Orthodox community. It’s about a member of the Orthodox community in Brooklyn breaking free from the mental and emotional prison of that community without really knowing that she was in a prison. It’s very hard to understand how free we are or not, or whether we are just stuck in a culture we agreed with because we didn’t have a choice. It’s a fascinating and touching story that made me question my own world, my own bubble and beliefs. The cast is unknown to me and it was a pleasure to discover such brilliant acting by unfamiliar faces. Pierre Bensusan: Azwan Pierre Bensusan is an incredibly gifted guitar player – more of an artist, really, or a poet. Some of his solo albums make it hard for the ear to believe that he is playing it all solo, which he does. This is not to take away from the humongous heart that goes into his playing. It’s sweet, melancholic, beautifully ancient-sounding at times, and will transport you into the evening with a dreamy stare in your eyes. Bensusan’s latest album, Azwan, features some talented guest musicians too. Azul My partner and I are rediscovering old-fashioned board games that require a good amount of time and headspace. Azul, in which one has to gain points by collecting colourful tiles and ordering them cleverly on the board, is very pleasant on the eye and mathematically lightly challenging. It stretches your mind with questions about skills and cunning versus luck of the draw, and why you actually won or lost. Gaga Online Gaga is the movement language of Ohad Naharin, one of the world’s masters of choreography who created a way to involve “normal” people in movement and dance. The language is simple yet powerful and deep, and a lot of fun too. Classes can be found online these days, and participation is on a donation basis. Certainly something to try at home! It’s always important, but especially now, to move every day. Our body is like an ocean of encoded information and wisdom – a lot of which we will never understand through the head, but only through experience and sensation. Banana pancakes Not only do we have time to cook now, we simply have to. On a “normal” week in my life I travel constantly and eat out a lot. Now, cooking has become a familiar routine and I love it. Finding little recipes that we can do together as a family with the kids is precious. The banana pancakes on superhealthykids.com has kept us going for three weekends in a row. The recipe has too many oats in it, so I reduce it a little. It’s delicious and hearty and not that unhealthy! (No sugar – until you put on the maple syrup.) This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.