On Sunday I received an email informing me that as someone shielding, showing some Covid-19 symptoms and participating in a trial, I am eligible for a test. I have tried four times to book my test: there are no postal tests currently available and the nearest testing centre slots I was offered were in either Plymouth or Barrow-in-Furness, both 150 miles away. Matt Hancock’s claims about meeting testing targets have as much credibility as my chance of getting to Cumbria from Oxfordshire in the 90 minutes before the offered appointment time.Prof David ThomasStanton Harcourt, Oxfordshire • Much has been made of the numbers of tests carried out during this pandemic, but I wonder what is happening once the tests have been done. I had mine last Wednesday, and expected the result within a few days. Seven days later, still no response whatsoever. If I’d had the virus a week ago, and been notified, I could have gone into isolation, protecting those around me. Fortunately for me, time rather than testing seems to have given me the answer!David PattersonWiveliscombe, Somerset • The government is promoting the self-administration of Covid-19 tests, with home testing kits supplied to members of the public. Inserting a swab into the highest part of the nose is quite uncomfortable and difficult, and indeed may be painful. It is probable that many self-administered swabs will be inserted inadequately. I would question whether it is even worth processing such swabs, as the accuracy will be entirely dubious.Peter EhrhardtRetired hospital paediatrician, Todmorden, West Yorkshire • I have an excellent helper who also looks after a number of other people, one of whom tested positive for Covid-19 last week, but has not shown any symptoms. My helper, who also has no symptoms, conscientiously applied for a test at a park and ride here in Oxford, where there was supposed to be a testing station. He was told that the facility was not functioning, that he did not qualify for a test as he had no symptoms but could go for a test in Birmingham or London! Whatever happened to the much trumpeted policy of mass testing and contact tracing as the way to curb the spread of the virus?Sylvia PlattOxford