Police in Nova Scotia knew that a gunman carrying out a murderous rampage was traveling in a fake police car 12 hours before they warned the public, according to a recently unsealed warrant. New details of Canada’s worst mass shooting were revealed on Tuesday after media outlets successfully petitioned for the unsealing of warrants used during the hunt for the man to search two properties he owned. Gabriel Wortman murdered 22 people on 18 and 19 April, before he was eventually shot dead by police outside a gas station. The latest revelations will add pressure to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, who have come under scrutiny for their response to the shooting and reports that neighbours had warned police that Wortman posed a threat before the murders. The 40-page document, part of which is redacted, describes Wortman as a “sociopath” and says he was stockpiling gasoline and ammunition. As police searched for Wortman on 20 April, a judge authorized federal police to search his two properties: his cottage in the coastal town of Portapique and another property nearby, called “the warehouse” in the documents. Wortman’s partner – who survived a severe beating the evening of 18 April at the start of his killing spree – told police that Wortman “wasn’t a police officer wannabe and didn’t like police officers and thought he was better than them”. The woman, who was handcuffed by Wortman but was able to escape, also told police that after he attacked her, she saw him pouring accelerant on his cottage – and he had several firearms in the vehicle he had designed to look like an RCMP cruiser. Shortly after they arrived at the scene of the first shooting in Portapique on the night of 18 April, a neighbour told officers that a man he identified as Wortman had shot at him and was driving a “police vehicle”. But it wasn’t until the next morning that police warned the public Wortman was driving a replica police vehicle, according to the warrant. While disguised as a police officer, Wortman killed six people, including an RCMP officer. Another acquaintance described Wortman as a “psychopath” and several people said they suspected he was stockpiling gasoline and propane tanks. According to the warrant, Wortman told residents that he kept barrels of lime and muriatic acid under the deck of one of his properties to help dispose of a body.