Exploring love, marriage and divorce, and later adapted for TV, Friend became a bestseller when it was published in 1988 in North Korea. It is now the first state-sanctioned novel available to English readers. Novels are wildly popular in North Korea, but the translations that reach us tend to be by dissidents or defectors. Paek Nam-nyong, a household name in the DPRK, is neither. A celebrity singer approaches an elderly judge, begging him for a divorce from her husband on the eve of their 10th wedding anniversary. Her husband works in a steel factory; they are “not on the same rhythm”, she declares, as different as a tambourine from a flute. The beleaguered judge decides to investigate for himself, becoming a detective-therapist-babysitter-in-one. He meets their anxious seven-year-old son, visits the steel factory, and interviews her “brusque, insensitive” husband, slowly discovering how the couple first met and fell in love on the factory floor. Marital discord often emerges in the novel from swapping typically gendered household labour: husbands take on the chores and childcare, while absent wives pursue careers outside the home. As the judge, Jeong Jin Wu, learns more about the singer’s relationship, we uncover his own troubles. Mostly living alone, he quietly tends to his wife’s plants in the makeshift greenhouse of their bedroom, while she, a single-minded agricultural scientist, works far away for 20 days of the month, trying to improve crop yield in her barren home village. When she accepted his marriage proposal among the snow-covered poplars, they were both university students: “Eun Ok, completely moved by Jeong Jin Wu’s commitment, gazed into his eyes and promised eternal love, a harmonious family, and positive results from the research lab.” Such humour abounds in the novel, lightly teasing state-sanctioned attitudes and the characters’ naive dreams. Translator Immanuel Kim searched the archives for an engrossing family saga among the thousands of didactic stories, and this tender, witty novel is indeed a page-turner. Neither a searing indictment of the regime nor a propaganda screed, Friend illuminates the personal rather than the political, the daily trials of workplace conflicts and marital woes. In doing so, it sharpens our ability to see the fragility and messy humanity in lives too often obscured by state agendas. • Friend, translated by Immanuel Kim, is published by Columbia (RRP £16).