Everyone can see it now. The coronavirus pandemic has worn away the thin veneer of prosperity that covered the rusty and battered British state – revealing that, whatever exceptional wealth exists in our society, it is useless in a crisis. What is the point of wealth if a country cannot provide protective equipment for its own doctors and nurses? The virus itself is only the official cause of what is on course to be the highest death toll in Europe: there are other underlying conditions, including the incompetence of this government and the self-destructive austerity imposed by its predecessors. But even if the government had locked down sooner, many never stood a chance. The poor, the underpaid and the disempowered have neither the labour rights nor the ability to protect themselves from the virus by self-isolating or defying employers who have not extended sufficient protection. The disparities are already coming into focus. People in deprived areas are dying at twice the rate  of those in affluent ones. Black and ethnic minority people, who are more likely to be employed in high-risk key worker roles, are dying at higher rates than the overall population. Many of these deaths have been the result of brutal structural inequality. This fatal systemic imbalance in our society can be seen most starkly by examining the deaths of care and health workers. Consider the case of Abdul Gellaledin, an ambulance care assistant in Kingston, south-west London. His job was to take patients from their homes, and care and nursing homes, to hospital and back. His family told me that he had been worried since the start of the pandemic: many of the patients he and his colleagues were transporting lived in care homes where the virus was spreading, and his requests for any form of protective gear had been refused by his employers. One day in March, he was sent with one colleague to pick up a patient from hospital. They found the patient unaccompanied in a wheelchair, and coughing. When they raised concerns, they were told by a nurse she had tested negative for Covid-19. They took her home, only to realise that she needed to be carried upstairs as she had no carer at the time; Gellaledin tried to avert his face while the patient coughed. They were not told that any physical assistance would be required, and were consequently unprepared; they were also not told that another ambulance crew had already declined the assignment on the grounds it was not safe. The patient later tested positive. On 9 April, Gellaledin died of coronavirus. He was 53. Gellaledin’s death is the result of a number of converging trends that have been growing for decades, and which have disproportionately claimed the lives of those at the sharp end of society’s inequalities. The ambulance he staffed was outsourced to a private company to help an underfunded NHS ambulance service – an arrangement that persists even after other private companies have been stripped of their contracts for poor performance after undercutting competitors on pricing. This race to the bottom meant that, when Gellaledin asked for personal protective equipment (PPE), he was not even given gloves, says his family. His employer, Falck UK Ambulance Services, is the British arm of the Danish group Falck. According to the company’s 2018 annual report, profitability had improved in its ambulance business unit as a result of “efficiency and cost-optimisation initiatives and an improved contract portfolio”. The CEO of Falck UK, Mark Raisbeck, maintains that: “All of our crews, including Abdul, have at all times been issued with PPE in full compliance with Public Health England guidelines.” He adds that it is “currently undertaking a full investigation in partnership with our NHS colleagues”. After Gellaledin’s death, Falck UK’s chief operating officer, Craig Smith, sent an email to staff calling for a minute’s silence to pay respects to their fallen colleague, a man of a “respectful nature” who had a “caring manner”. There was no mention of Gellaledin’s cause of death at the end of 11 days in a medically induced coma. There comes a point when we must stop and appraise what it means to be a civilised country, what it means to be a wealthy one. That point is when a man who is carrying the aged, the sick and the vulnerable has to keep showing up to work despite worrying that he is not receiving basic protection in a pandemic. That point is when a nation’s health service is so cash-strapped that it has to hire private companies whose worst case scenario isn’t the needless death of a worker; it’s a loss to shareholders. The economic prosperity we have in the UK has been accumulated through years of aggressive liberalisation and privatisation, sacrificing the health, safety, dignity and lives of others. To Britain’s vulnerable precariat, this has been apparent for a long time. To them, the crisis was always here. As their deaths swell Britain’s mortality toll, we can no longer look at ourselves as a nation and see any metric of affluence that we should be proud of. With every death that could have been avoided – because the systems that could have prevented them have been expunged by austerity – we should ask ourselves, what is our national wealth for? • Nesrine Malik is a Guardian columnist