The A Word (BBC One) | iPlayerIsolation Stories (ITV) | ITV HubThe Eddy (Netflix)Trying (Apple TV+)Homeland (Channel 4) | All 4 The A Word returned to burnish its credentials as one of the most welcome, nuanced, humanly messy outings to grace the BBC’s output these days. A couple of years on and writer Peter Bowker’s creation of Joe, the marvellous young Max Vento, continues to cause tumults of heart-sorry love, bite-the-walls frustration, wry laughter and wry sobs amid his family, amid those stunning northern fells, and now amid a backdrop of splintered parents living apart. And every parent, never mind every parent of an A-word (autistic) child, can surely grasp the import of the word “change” on the young, even the apparently invulnerable. Joe is 10 now, and coping with change by dumping his headphones, and his dad’s beloved MP3d punk, which the two of them used to share, when he thinks he’s not “home”. As indeed he’s not, any more. Paul and Alison live 100 miles apart, in new places: a squat, lakeside, stone cottage for Paul (Lee Ingleby); a cheap-swish, Manc dockside mezzanine for Alison (Morven Christie). Christopher Eccleston, still managing to keep his performance just the right side of comedic, cliched “fit northern granda” – and it’s quite a skill, and finely borne – is still portrayed as the galumphing, tactless one, but now I’m less sure: his boots-on approach to Joe seems to bear more fruit than Paul’s wriggling, passive empathy and Alison’s controlling righteousness, which after all led to that split. As often with this series, the lens that shines on the differently abled – Joe, and Ralph, the son with Down’s syndrome (a phenomenal Leon Harrop) of granda Maurice’s love interest – only serves to refract the limitations of the word “normal” when applied to adults. Expect also some standout work from (of course) Julie Hesmondhalgh, who very soon comes into her own as Joe’s teacher, and Molly Wright as sister Rebecca, the only person Joe fully “gets”, now threatening more change via an accidental uni pregnancy, the ramifications of which Joe will cope with by obsessing about car-seat rights. As, actually, one well might. Hardly to be outdone, ITV shone with Isolation Stories, the first serious TV dramas to be made under lockdown. Jeff Pope and his writers (Gaby Chiappe, William Ivory, Neil McKay), under strictures that meant everything had to be filmed by partners or co-quarantined similars, and overseen remotely by Zoom or some such, managed to give us almost a full week of edgy and delightful drama that will surely be referred back to by chroniclers of these times. A handful of intriguing 15-minute scripts, a handful of fine actors, filmed at home, with occasional split-screens to reflect the ongoing frustrations of lockdown – co-workers here, a therapist there – and who needs ritzy, pricey locations any more? One might ask. What struck about the entire week was the difference in needs. Some – and what happened to them in childhood to make them so needy? – sobbed on phone-camera, or wheedled, or boasted. Some, er, simply coped. All British life was here. And one or two of those who were proudest of the coping were, simply, found wanting. As I might have mentioned, life is messy. This was a great venture, helped immensely by Sheridan Smith and young Tom Glenister. The Eddy, parlayed in a kind of mongrel Franglais-Arabic on the backstreets of Paris – the shonky suburbs beyond the tracks of the Petite Ceinture that also formed so many settings for Spiral – is something of a labour of love, all about a dingy, tottering jazz club kept alive through force of personality and sweet, soulful music. The actors either are musicians, or have learned so to become, and it has behind it director Damien Chazelle (Whiplash, La La Land) and, as writer, our own Jack Thorne. It’s not short on style. The sax player, for instance, has one of those make-your-mind-up beards only ever encountered in one of two manifestations: a hot, young, black sax player dishing it out in a dirty, basement jazz club in Paris or a Belgian mime artist. The three-generation jazz lovers in the immigration squats of Paris, grandmother beside grandson, have mastered the Arabic art of singing with a smouldering fag between the lips. It feels stylish yet true, and so it’s a welcome universe away from last week’s Netflix Hollywood thing, with its rip-off credo that “style” can be had for a cheap, raffia trilby and a poster of a trumpet. Not short on style, but that’s part of the problem. The moody shots, the endless rehearsals, the fiddly, stop-start tuning… I loved it, but even I accept it could have done with a plot. So far, Chazelle seems to be showrunning by draping good jazz on top of a trepanned basic story, about an exiled African American and his stroppy daughter and some Serbian money-goons. It remains to be seen whether Thorne will in future weeks flex his undoubted writing muscles, or bow and take the back seat to his weighty, garlanded director’s singular (if plot-thin) vision. That all said, if Chazelle’s La La Land was bubblegum jazz (which it avowedly was, quite unlike Whiplash, which approached the music like a grown-up), then this is the stuff of cheroots and switchblades. And jazz bounces a little higher once more on its newly healthy tendril, which is the hope of rescue from cliched irrelevance and wilful misunderstanding. Trying is Apple TV+’s first dedicated comedy, apparently, and rather good for what it is. What it is is something about a north London couple trying to adopt, and a refreshingly non-Richard Curtis London couple, for what’s sure to be a global viewership, or as much as Apple TV+ can depend on a global viewership, which is frankly not yet much. It’s funny, genuinely, with some very good lines. Rafe Spall as Jason excels as one half of the trying couple, lugubrious and staunchly anti-intellectual, yet half-wise. Where it falls down, and certainly not with the actor, Esther Smith (Nikki), is in the tweeness of characterisation. In 2005 film critic Nathan Rabin coined, not entirely unkindly, the phrase “manic pixie dream girl” for a certain type of heroine, and Nikki’s certainly that – dungarees, breezy kookiness, squirrels and rainbows. Unfortunately, this all spills over into the adoption process, with Nikki constantly trying to better herself (reading Dostoevsky, attending lectures with three highlighter pens) rather than Just Being Herself. Which will win in the long run. I’m sorry, it’s rather good, but it irritated, with its cliched (bad) books versus (good) carefree-beach vibe, when there’s no quandary. It’s not a zero-sum game. Homeland, which ended its long and breathless run last week, allegedly for ever, was – for those who stuck the distance – a gift-yielding, immense reward, not least in its uncanny ability to spot some tendencies early: troll farms, fake news, presidents sacking wholesale their intelligence departments, unintelligently. It had to go wrong somewhere, and this last outing, featuring a nuclear standoff on the Pakistan border, hardly chimed with current worries – but it hardly mattered, so good has been the perennial play-off between mentor Saul and hustling renegade Carrie. I can’t quite believe I shall be seeing no longer that platonic double-crossing double act of Claire Danes and Mandy Patinkin, which near-concluded with Carrie ensconced in Moscow and Saul still alive both despite and because of his stubbornness. It actual-concluded a while later, Carrie slipping Saul high-grade intelligence in the spine of a book, and thank whew: never had I seen her so ill at ease as living a settled, charmed, moneyed life, with gowns and concerts and jewels. Danes surely has a face that lives only when perched on some emotional (or literal) tripwire, the more fraught the better, and I actually refuse to countenance the potential for a spin-off series being pointlessly squandered.