More countries across Europe are preparing to reopen schools in the coming weeks despite conflicting advice from scientists, some of whom caution against underestimating children’s potential to spread the coronavirus. Some schools and nurseries in Denmark and Norway have already reopened, and grandparents in Switzerland are allowed to hug grandchildren under 10, following a ruling by the health ministry’s head of infectious diseases that it is safe to do so. France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, has gone against the advice of the government’s scientific committee by announcing that creches and primary and nursery schools will reopen progressively from 11 May. Playgrounds began reopening in Germany on Friday and pupils aged 11 and 12 are due to return to school in a staggered system starting next week. Classes will be split in two and the groups will alternate between lessons at school and at home. Hygiene measures being adopted across Europe include strict handwashing and disinfection regimes, physical distancing and the demarcation of playgrounds into zones to ensure pupils do not mix more than necessary. Children will have to file out of classrooms at different times to maintain physical distancing. Germany has temporarily removed sport and music lessons from the curriculum because they are considered too great a risk, but older pupils already returned to sit exams last month. Nurseries will remain closed for all children, except those of key workers, for the time being. French lower secondary schools may only return in areas where the virus is not widely circulating. All ball games and contact sports will be banned and objects touched by more than one pupil must be disinfected. Classes will be staggered and made up of a maximum of 15 pupils, and breaks will held in shifts to avoid overcrowding in corridors and playgrounds. Many teachers say the draft health protocol detailing the regulations is unworkable, especially for classes of younger children. Céline Prier-Cheron, a trade union representative and teacher at a primary school in the Eure-et-Loir, told French TV: “How do you explain to children in nursery schools that they have to raise their hand to take an object, get up, go talk to a friend while respecting the barrier and distancing rules? “This health protocol cannot be applied as it is, especially in nursery schools. Teaching is based on the handling of objects, especially in nursery. If we have to disinfect objects each time a child has handled them, it’ll be impossible.” The parents’ federation, the FCPE, tweeted that parents were reluctant to send children back to school. “That is what our members are telling us, but they are obviously also under constraints from their employers,” it wrote. “But there are still too many uncertainties.” The president of Germany’s main teachers’ union, Heinz-Peter Meidinger, said he supported the plan to teach children in alternating shifts, but that regulating hygiene measures was a “mammoth task”. Despite the phased reopenings, scientists in Germany have said children with the coronavirus may be as infectious as adults, and urged caution. Researchers who analysed data on infected people found that the viral loads in children differed little from those in adults. Opening schools on the assumption that children are less likely to spread the virus was therefore ill-advised, said Christian Drosten, a virologist and Germany’s leading coronavirus expert, who led the team. Drosten’s study, which was released this week, examined the viral loads in the throats of 3,721 people, including more than 100 children, who tested positive for coronavirus in Berlin between January and April. He said he had been able to carry out his analysis once the number of tests carried out by Labor Berlin, the largest laboratory of its kind in Europe, had reached the critical mass of 60,000 earlier this week. That gave him and his team enough data to be able to carry out an analysis of children who have had the virus. Data on children has been scant because of the lack of tests that have been carried out on them, often because they show few if any symptoms. “The end result is as clear as glass,” Drosten said on his podcast with the broadcaster NDR. “Children do not have significantly different concentrations of the virus in their respiratory passages compared to adults.” Drosten said children were as likely to spread the virus as adults, particularly given their social behaviour, including an inability to practice physical distancing, their increased mobility and a tendency to sing and cry – activities proven to give the virus droplets as much force as a cough or a sneeze. Lothar Wieler, the head of Germany’s leading disease control body, the Robert Koch Institute, said on Thursday that children play just as important a role in spreading the disease as adults. “They can be infected, they can excrete the virus and they can infect others,” he said.