Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: The total number of coronavirus deaths across the world has reached at least 268,999, according to Johns Hopkins University, which has tracked the spread of the virus. There are 3,846,949 confirmed cases. A report by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) was abruptly shelved by the White House, according to Associated Press. The document includes step-by-step guidance on how and when local authorities should allow businesses to reopen and life to resume as normal. US unemployment claims hit 33.3 million, and the death toll passed 75,000. “Something happened,” Trump told US reporters in the Oval Office when asked about the theory that the coronavirus was released from the Wuhan Institute of Virology. “Probably it was incompetence. Somebody was stupid,” the US president added during a meeting with the Texas governor. It comes after Mike Pompeo claimed he had seen “enormous evidence” that the virus had originated at the lab. No evidence has been produced. China has denied the claims. Trump meanwhile tested negative for coronavirus, after his personal valet was confirmed to be infected. The Australian government has pushed back at US claims the coronavirus may have originated in a Wuhan lab and has determined that a “dossier” giving weight to the theory is not a Five Eyes intelligence document. Australia’s prime minister, Scott Morrison outlined the three steps the country will take to achieve a “Covid-safe economy in July of this year”. However, the final decisions on the easing of restrictions remains in the hands of state governments. Up to 190,000 people could die of Covid-19 during the first year of the pandemic if containment measures fail, according to a study by the World Health Organisation (WHO) based on prediction modelling and analysing 47 countries in the region. The organisation also warned that the virus could ‘smoulder’ on the continent for years. Mexico’s health ministry on Thursday reported 1,982 new confirmed cases of coronavirus infections and 257 additional fatalities, the most lethal day since the pandemic reached the Latin America’s second largest country. Infections in Pakistan have risen by 1,764 over the previous 24 hours, officials said on Friday, taking the total to 25,837. Deaths rose by 30 to 594.