Hard to set something in Ibiza, isn’t it? There are reasons for this, obviously: that most people’s idea of Ibiza was fixed a long time ago, the summer they turned 20, during one particularly hedonistic week they spent there getting rawly sunburned, only eating one meal in eight days and shaking Tim Westwood’s hand at a urinal seconds after dropping their first ever pill. Capturing that sweat-sticky, flirting-with-the-shots-girl feeling on film is close to impossible. Also, there’s something inescapably Ibizan about Ibiza, some salty magick that leaks out from the rocks and sand, a fine film that settles over everything it touches. Much like EastEnders can only happen in the miserable confines of outer east London, and the backbiting of Emmerdale can only happen in a small town that smells of manure, so Ibiza-set programmes are necessarily shaped by the island’s inherent ridiculousness. Turn round and salute the sun gods who brought you here. Offer them a fresh bag of MDMA along the blanched white bones of the beach. And so to White Lines (Friday, Netflix), which on the surface should be rubbish. “A woman leaves her quiet Manchester home to identify the body of her brother who disappeared 20 years prior,” the press release says. “While investigating the mystery, she gets pulled into a world of crime, excess and coke-filled banana boats.” Laura Haddock (Guardians of the Galaxy) plays the titular “a woman”. Daniel Mays (Line of Duty, Rogue One, everything) is the one with the banana boat full of coke. An expansive English–Spanish cast keeps various story plates spinning: there is a shady, rich, Spanish matriarch with a secret to hide, a security detail with a heart of gold (Or? Is? He?), and Angela Griffin, who for some reason is in charge of orgiastic sex parties. Played wrong, this would just be big-budget Kevin & Perry Go Large: dance scenes that push home how Very Important being on ecstasy feels, a smudgy glamour of cocaine and white bikinis and getting your legs broken by drug wholesalers. And don’t get me wrong, White Lines has all that. But it’s played with a lighter touch, Ibiza the beat pulsing in the background, not the lead vocals. What’s unfurling in front of you is a genuinely intriguing mystery with enough sleights-of-hand to keep you guessing throughout. It’s just unfurling while Daniel Mays spills so much coke across his lawn that his dogs get high. White Lines is the answer to the question nobody has ever thought to ask: what if Poirot got on the sesh? Curiously, for a Netflix production, White Lines defies the binge: there’s so much going on – so many threads and flashbacks and days turning to night – that it’s hard to consume more than an episode at a time. This feels weirdly refreshing, pulling you back from the sprint-to-the-finish watch-through like a bouncer in a smoking section. For that reason, it doesn’t quite feel like it’s Netflix’s next discourse-shaping blockbuster. But it does prove there’s still space for TV dependables: a murder that needs solving, a secret from the past that threatens the calm of the present, and people with Drama Centre Manc accents passing ecstasy around while loudly saying “proper”.