On Friday health secretary Matt Hancock announced that the UK had achieved its target of carrying out 100,000 tests per day. Of the reported 122,347 tests on 30 April, a total of 27,497 had simply been delivered to people’s homes and 12,872 to other centres. Only a small proportion of those 40,000 tests sent out have been used so far. By Sunday, the figure had dropped to 76,496 to much disconcertion. Are people right to be worried about the number of tests available? There are valid concerns that while the tests are being delivered in high numbers, they may not all be usable. It is still unclear whether tests sent to care homes can be administered by staff, who are currently not registered to carry out nursing tasks. Some have even been sent tests without return envelopes. Despite some friction in the process of rolling out testing, the number of tests actually carried out is still a very impressive achievement. The real concern is our capacity to act on the results of the tests. Simply doing tests in response to demand will be inadequate. Instead we must use each result to find cases, trace those who have been in contact with a person who has tested positive and ensure that those infected, or potentially infected, self-isolate. Only these four steps used in conjunction will prevent a second wave of the virus and protect vulnerable people. Although technology and apps may well help, this exercise will require the mobilisation of thousands of workers to interview cases, identify contacts and take swabs. Contact tracing is a skilled activity, usually done by specially trained nurses or environmental health officers, and we need to ensure that we have enough trained people to do this before we get to that part of the recovery phase. Once cases have been identified, self-isolation will be key to lowering the rate of transmission. People who test positive and those they have been in contact with will have to shut themselves off to the rest of the world for 14 days. For the minority who refuse to do this, strict sanctions may be needed. If testing is not followed up by contact tracing and self-isolation, we run the risk of a large outbreak, as happened in South Korea with Patient 31 and the Shincheonji church. This patient apparently continued to attend the church even though she had symptoms and went on to generate a cluster of more than 4,400 cases of Covid-19. Can we accept a single negative result as a guarantee that an individual isn’t infectious and can go about their daily life? Unfortunately it is not that simple. No test is 100% definitive; the Covid-19 virus detection tests will give negative results in a proportion of infected people. A false result may be because the sample was not taken properly, which is always an issue if people are taking their own swabs. Those who test negative but still exhibit symptoms, especially if they have been in contact with a known case, will have to assume they have the infection. Even in people without symptoms there is no guarantee that 24 hours later they will not be symptomatic and infectious. “Treat the patient, not the test” is an often-repeated truism in medicine and a phrase we are likely to hear more and more as testing is rolled out across the country. On the other hand, people who have tested positive can assume they are immune to reinfection for at least a time. Finally, we must be careful that the data from all the tests being done does not hide the reality of the epidemic from the public. We are now moving from NHS to commercial mass-testing, and all this new testing will push up reported cases dramatically over the coming days. One of the common pitfalls when investigating any outbreak of infectious disease is changing how new cases are identified and counted mid-epidemic. For the time being we must still focus on pillar-one testing – NHS swab testing for those with medical needs and critical key workers – and reported fatalities to show how the epidemic is progressing in the UK rather than on total positives. Despite the concern over figures, we have achieved a remarkable feat in increasing our testing capacity to these levels. We are now faced with the even more challenging task of using that testing capacity, and the results generated, to reduce case numbers, reduce demand for hospital beds and reduce deaths. Paul Hunter is professor in medicine at the University of East Anglia