Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: Italy is reopening bars, cafes, restaurants and hairdressers – with social distancing measures in place – for the first time since its lockdown began. Meanwhile, in Spain, almost three-quarters of the country progressed to the second phase of its lockdown de-escalation, allowing millions of people to meet up in groups of up to 10, and to have a drink or a meal on cafe and restaurant terraces. There are 4,727,625 confirmed cases of coronavirus worldwide. At least 315,482 people have died over the course of the pandemic. The number of deaths in the US is approaching 90,000, with 89,564 confirmed fatalities and 1,486,742 infections, according to the Johns Hopkins University tracker. Japan dived into its first recession since 2015, according to official data on Monday, with the world’s third-largest economy contracting by 0.9% in the first quarter as it wrestled with the fallout from the coronavirus. South Africa reported 1,160 new coronavirus infections, the highest daily number since the first case was recorded in March. The Western Cape province, popular with tourists, accounted for nearly 60% of the national numbers. 8,926 new infections were recorded in the last 24 hours, as anti-virus restrictions ease and officials say the situation is stabilising. The BBC has reported that the mayor of São Paulo, the country’s largest city, has warned that hospitals have reached 90% capacity and are “near collapse”. They could run out of space in two weeks’ time, he said. Brazil has the fourth-highest number of infections worldwide, with 241,080, according to Johns Hopkins University figures. It has recorded 16,118 deaths. Meanwhile, the Brazilian president, Jair Bolsonaro, greeted hundreds of supporters who gathered before the presidential offices Sunday and joined some in a series of push-ups. Taiwan had been lobbying to take part in the World Health Assembly, which opens later on Monday, but did not get invited due to Chinese pressure, its foreign minister said, adding they had agreed to put the issue off until later this year. The coronavirus pandemic, which has shuttered borders and devastated the tourism-reliant country, caused the economy to shrink for the first time in six years. Michael O’Leary described the UK’s planned introduction of a 14-day quarantine period for travellers arriving from abroad as “idiotic and unimplementable”.