Football fans across the globe will become fussball fans this weekend as the Bundesliga becomes the first major European league to return to action. More than two long months have passed since a ball was last kicked in Germany’s top flight, so we are bringing you back up to speed with the team of the season so far. Yann Sommer has been one of the Bundesliga’s most reliable shot stoppers since he joined Gladbach in 2014. The Swiss international has been kept busy in that time. Gladbach are fourth in the league and he is a large part of that success, making more saves (89) than any other keeper. Gladbach have conceded just 30 goals in their 25 league games – only Bayern Munich and RB Leipzig have conceded fewer. Rating: 6.86 In terms of his attacking output, you could consider Achraf Hakimi the Trent Alexander-Arnold of the Bundesliga. They are very different in their approaches, but both have a huge impact on their team’s attacking intent, with the Moroccan – who is on loan from Real Madrid – scoring three goals and setting up 10 more. The 21-year-old is one of just five players to reach double figures for assists in the league this season. His electric pace and intelligent movement off the ball help him get to the byline with great frequency. Rating: 7.36 Dayot Upamecano has been considered a top prospect for some time now, yet this season has been something of a breakthrough. The 21-year-old is defensively sound, but his composure on the ball is what really catches the eye. His 88.8% pass accuracy is impressive and he combines that with an ability to dribble the ball out from the centre of defence. Upamecano has an unusual set of skills – and has attracted attention from a number of Premier League clubs. Rating: 7.23 Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/05/12-56802-gnl.fsof.200513.jf.Fascism.mp3 Following a switch to a back three under new coach Julian Nagelsmann, Marcel Halstenberg has made the transition from full-back to left-sided centre-back with ease since January. His attacking output has suffered somewhat – although he has still chipped in with two goals and three assists this season – but there’s little doubt that the 28-year-old is one of the most underrated and versatile defenders in Europe right now. Rating: 7.30 Alphonso Davies is another player who is proving that age and experience are not always necessary at the back. He has been a revelation this season – and he is playing out of position at full-back. Davies could work on his defensive positioning, but his recovery speed is remarkable and the timing of his tackling has been a real surprise, averaging 2.8 successful challenges per 90 minutes. The 19-year-old’s attacking threat is his greatest asset, however. He has completed an outstanding 4.8 dribbles per 90 minutes and has four assists in the league. Rating: 7.53 Remember when Gnabry couldn’t get a sniff on loan at West Brom under Tony Pulis? Well, four years on, the winger is a key player for a couple of the best teams in the world – Bayern at club level and Germany at international level. Since returning to his homeland from Arsenal, Gnabry has reached double figures for goals in four consecutive Bundesliga seasons and this is unquestionably his best campaign yet. With 11 goals and nine assists, the 24-year-old has had a direct hand in a goal every 80 minutes on average. His confidence is clearly through the roof, as underlined by his 4.2 shots per 90 minutes. Rating: 7.60 You will be hard pressed to find a more elegant midfielder than Thiago Alcântara. A string of serious injuries have prevented the Spaniard from being considered among Europe’s finest players. On his day he is just that, and while an outstanding 90.8% pass accuracy is par for the course for Thiago, his defensive work often goes unheralded. Yet this season he has really put in a shift, averaging 2.4 tackles and 2.4 interceptions per 90 minutes. Rating: 7.54 After a relatively slow start to life at RB Leipzig after his move from PSG, Christopher Nkunku can now be considered one of the signings of last summer’s transfer window. The 22-year-old has been a hugely creative force in the Bundesliga, amassing 12 assists even though he has only started 15 of his 23 appearances so far. His average of four key passes per 90 minutes is also sensational. Rating: 7.52 Last season was Jadon Sancho’s breakthrough campaign, but this term he has put to bed any questions about whether he could sustain his form in emphatic fashion. The 20-year-old has been even more productive. Earlier this year he became the first player in Europe’s top five leagues to reach double figures for both goals (14) and assists (15). It’s a feat he has now achieved in consecutive seasons and one that only Lionel Messi has matched this term. Rating: 7.90 Robert Lewandowski is our highest rated player in the Bundesliga by a considerable distance this season. His form in front of goal has been frightening. He has scored 25 goals in his 23 appearances and is well on his way to winning his fifth Bundesliga golden boot. Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang’s tally of 31 goals in a league season is looking vulnerable and Lewandowski may yet have designs on the all-time record of 40 set by Bayern legend Gerd Müller almost 50 years ago. Rating: 8.16 Lewandowski has an unsurprising strike partner in this XI. Timo Werner has enjoyed the sort of season that would otherwise have made him the pacesetter in the race for the golden boot. As it is he’s four short of on Lewandowski’s total, with 21 goals from his 25 appearances – to go with his seven assists. The 24-year-old’s development this season has been significant – has already scored more goals this season that he did all of last season (16). And his accuracy has also improved – he is now scoring with 22% of his shots, a healthy rise from last season. Rating: 7.58 • Visit WhoScored for more statistics and analysis• Follow WhoScored and Martin Laurence on Twitter