The Roman author Pliny the Younger advised “kissing the hairy muzzle of a mouse” as a cure for the common cold. His fellow countrymen linked mice to the god Apollo, who could bring deadly plague upon them with his arrows. So they might not have seen the funny side of a lifelike mouse made out of a strip of leather which has been newly discovered at the Roman fort of Vindolanda, south of Hadrian’s Wall, near Hexham, Northumberland. About the size of a real rodent and lying unnoticed until now among thousands of leather offcuts held by the Vindolanda Museum since 1993, it looks as if it had been squashed flat after being run over – perhaps by a Roman cart. Whether it was a practical joke or a child’s toy will never be known, but the find has excited archaeologists, who are unaware of anything comparable from the Roman world. Barbara Birley, curator of the Vindolanda Museum, told the Observer: “It’s a fabulous little piece. We weren’t expecting to find something like that.” If it was a practical joke, it was convincing, she said. “If you were working in a dark Roman room, because they didn’t have a huge amount of indoor lighting, you could definitely see it as a little mouse,” she said. “Especially because it’s not [like] Mickey Mouse with big ears. It looks very realistic.” Vindolanda was built by the Roman army before Hadrian began constructing his 73-mile defensive barrier to guard the north-western frontier from invaders in AD122. It was an important garrison base, demolished and rebuilt repeatedly. It was there that archaeologists unearthed a cavalry barracks dating from AD105, finding extraordinary military and personal possessions left behind by soldiers. Birley’s husband Andrew is director of excavations and chief executive of the Vindolanda Trust. He said that mice would have been a constant pest in ancient Vindolanda. “When the granary buildings at Vindolanda were excavated in 2008, the bones from thousands of dead mice were uncovered below the floors of the buildings where they had been living and feasting on the ears of grain that had dropped between the flagstones into the basements of the buildings,” he said. “It is perhaps therefore rather wonderful that someone 2,000 years ago made a toy mouse from leather, crafting something to play with from their immediate environment.” Vindolanda’s spectacular finds include famous writing tablets offering insights into the everyday lives of people living and working there 2,000 years ago, rare cavalry swords and the largest collection of boots and shoes to have survived from Roman Britain, among more than 7,000 leather objects and offcuts. Studying every piece has been painstakingly slow. It is thanks to the coronavirus lockdown that curatorial staff have had the time to focus on the task. The mouse had gone unnoticed when it was placed in a bag of scrap leather in 1993. It was among offcuts gathered by archaeologists who were then excavating the commanding officers residence dating to about AD105-130. The mouse had come from one of its rooms. Birley said: “It just shows that the collection can continue to reveal things that we weren’t expecting to find.” They hope to display the mouse when the museum reopens.