Sign up for the Week in Patriarchy, a newsletter​ on feminism and sexism sent every Saturday “I’m saying unequivocally: it never, never happened.” On Friday Joe Biden made his first public comment on the allegation that he sexually assaulted a former Senate staffer, Tara Reade, in 1993. After weeks of silence, the presumptive Democratic nominee categorically denied the accusation in a Medium post and in an interview on MSNBC’s Morning Joe. “This never happened, and when she first made the claim, we made it clear that it never happened, and it’s as simple as that,” the former vice-president said on Morning Joe. But, of course, it isn’t as simple as that. While it’s commendable that Biden finally addressed Reade’s allegations directly, instead of having his campaign issue more denials, he needs to go further. Biden must authorize a search of his Senate papers, which are held at the University of Delaware, to identify any evidence of the complaint that Reade says she made about him at the time. Morning Joe co-host Mika Brzezinski repeatedly asked Biden if he would authorize such a search; his answer was “no.” Biden said that he would ask the National Archives to make public any record of a complaint filed by Reade, but would not allow his Senate papers to be unsealed as they “do not contain personnel files” and could become political “fodder”. That’s not good enough. Surely Biden can order an independent investigation of his Senate papers for mentions of Reade without compromising other sensitive information? If he’s not capable of doing that then I’m not sure he’s capable of being the president of the United States. But what about the current president? What about the pussy-grabber in chief? What about the dozens of sexual harassment allegations against him? Why should Biden be held to a higher standard than Donald Trump? There has been a huge amount of whataboutism by liberals when it comes to the allegations against Biden. I can understand the frustration fueling this: the fact that Trump supporters are suddenly concerned about sexual consent is jaw-droppingly hypocritical. The White House counselor Kellyanne Conway, for example, seems to have suddenly become a massive #MeToo advocate. “‘Believe all women’ means all women,” Conway told Fox News on Friday. “Let’s not pretend Joe Biden doesn’t have a history of, without permission, and without restraint, planting his face in the back of women’s heads, sniffing their hair, fondling their necks and creeping them out,” Conway further noted. Hang on, does this woman know who she works for? Does she have any shame at all? But it’s not just Trump supporters who are being hypocritical. Conservatives have rightly pointed out the difference in the way Democrats and the mainstream media treated the sexual assault allegations against supreme court justice Brett Kavanaugh versus the allegations against Biden. There is arguably a lot more evidence supporting the allegations against Biden than there ever was against Kavanaugh, but there’s a hell of a lot less liberal outrage. When confronted with a question about those double standards on Thursday, Nancy Pelosi responded by saying that she didn’t need a “lecture or a speech” and “Joe Biden is Joe Biden”. An extremely persuasive retort. I’m not sure that the allegations against Biden will end up doing any serious damage to his campaign. However, the way in which the Democratic party and liberals have rallied behind him is going to do a huge amount of damage to #MeToo. Alyssa Milano, the woman who helped mainstream #MeToo, choosing to believe Biden over Reade will be brought up every single time someone says “believe women”. The way in which liberals downplayed allegations against Biden will be used as ammunition every single time someone on the right is accused of sexual assault. Indeed, Trump is already using the Democrats’ defense of Biden to discredit his own accusers. When asked about the Reade allegations by reporters on Thursday he mused that Biden that might have been falsely accused. “It could be false accusations. I know all about false accusations,” he said. “I’ve been falsely charged numerous times, and there is such a thing.” Trump then went on to speak about Kavanaugh, saying: “He was falsely charged. What happened with him was an absolute disgrace to our country.” I’ll tell you what’s an absolute disgrace to America: the fact that, in November, women will be forced to choose between two men credibly accused of sexual assault for president. The New Zealand Prostitution Reform Act, developed with the input of sex workers, decriminalized sex work in 2003. This means that sex workers are able to apply for emergency wage subsidies during the coronavirus crisis like any other self-employed person. Contrast this to the dire situation sex workers in places like India, the UK and US now find themselves in. America has a proud pussy-grabber as its president but sex workers, or anyone whose professional activities involve “prurient” products or content, can’t get emergency loans designated for the self-employed. “Chat about Kushner’s face started last year after he was interviewed on HBO and his weirdly dewy and immobile skin led some to compare him to a ‘wet, haunted doll’,” Hadley Freeman notes. But is it OK to speculate about the world’s creepiest Ken doll potentially having had cosmetic surgery? In short, yes. Like many people, I always thought they were a married couple but the models in the famous Grant Wood painting are actually the artist’s sister and their family dentist, who was meant to portray their father. There’s a 32-year age difference between two. In an interesting Twitter thread, Summer Brennan unpicks the gendered assumptions that often inform how we look at art. A significant move for a country which has one of the highest rates of FGM in the world. According to the UN, 87% of Sudanese women have undergone the practice. The marriage rate in America fell 6% in 2018 to only 6.5 new marriages formed for every 1,000 people. That’s the lowest number since recordkeeping began in 1867. Belgians are being asked to eat fries twice a week to help the country get rid of a surplus of potatoes caused by the coronavirus crisis. Now this is the sort of civic duty I can get behind.