A pair of stilettos worn by Amy Winehouse and handwritten lyrics by Bono are among the most eye-catching items in an auction being run by Island Records. The auction is to aid charities amid the coronavirus outbreak. Funds raised by the One Love Covid-19 Relief Auction – named after a song by one of the label’s most famous signings, Bob Marley – will go to NHS Charities Together in the UK and Feeding America in the US. Island Records was co-founded by Chris Blackwell in 1959, and went on to sign artists such as U2, Roxy Music and Ariana Grande. One of the lots on auction is a stay at Blackwell’s five-star hotel, Strawberry Hill, in Jamaica’s Blue Mountains. Bono will sign lyrics to Where the Streets Have No Name for the winner of a signed Joshua Tree box set, while Annie Lennox will handwrite and frame lyrics to Eurythmics’ Sweet Dreams. Portishead’s Beth Gibbons will handwrite lyrics of the winner’s choice, while Jon Bon Jovi will pen Livin’ On A Prayer and Wanted Dead Or Alive. The late Nick Drake’s sister, Gabrielle, will write a card to the winner of his complete back catalogue releases. Mumford & Sons are offering a one-on-one banjo lesson with signed banjo, while Portishead’s Adrian Utley is offering online guitar and synth classes. Other Portishead swag includes a gold disc, and Geoff Barrow’s Technics decks from the time of the band’s landmark debut album, Dummy. Other artists offering instruments including Shawn Mendes, Ben Howard, OneRepublic and Bombay Bicycle Club. Abbey Road Studios are offering a private tour, and street artist Mr Brainwash is giving a print of Bob Marley. Those donating stage outfits or other items of clothing include Jessie Buckley with clothes worn in the film Wild Rose, plus Sean Paul, Dizzee Rascal, Hozier, Ella Eyre and Catfish & the Bottlemen. Giggs is offering his 2010 Mobo award for best hip-hop artist, and Dermot Kennedy and Jamie Cullum are among those who will perform private streamed concerts. The auction takes place online from 6pm BST on Thursday 21 May, and will be hosted by Broadway and Pose star Billy Porter.