What were you hoping for?A fun chat that didn’t involve a quiz. First impressions?Is this a person being held against their will? He was sitting in a dimly lit room that looked a bit like a scene in Homeland. Once he turned on the light, I could see he was handsome. What did you talk about?Just the usual stuff: my cocktails, his homemade pie, life in a severe pandemic lockdown in Hong Kong. Any awkward moments?When I insistently asked to see the pie he had made, of which there was only one slice left, and it came out of a small Tupperware box. Second, when I started singing a song – was it Let It Be? I can’t remember. Good table manners?His Greek takeaway never arrived, but generally he was very polite. How long did you stay on the call?Around an hour and a half. Best thing about Jayson?He was up for having a bit of fun. Did you introduce him to your housemates?I did not. Describe Jayson in three wordsCute, smart and fun. What do you think he made of you?I wonder, especially because I’d had quite a lot to drink and broke into song. Any connection issues?It was pretty laggy at times. And… did you swap numbers?We did. How did the date end?It officially ended on the Zoom call, then we had a WhatsApp call and Jayson took me up on to the roof of his building in Hong Kong. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Probably the pie. I also wonder whether spending the money the Guardian gave me for a takeaway on cocktails was the best idea. Marks out of 10?A solid eight. Would you meet again in person?Obviously, Jayson lives in Asia, which isn’t the easiest place to get to. We’ll have to see how things virtually pan out. What were you hoping for?A new connection. Social distancing gets you to think about how important it is to have human connection. First impressions?He seemed nervous, which I thought was cute. He had framed his screen so he had a cool film poster and a picture of London behind him, so I knew he had an aesthetic. What did you talk about?Where we would’ve been if it weren’t for the virus; Sonny and Cher; how weird the date was since we weren’t doing it in person. And where my food was. Any awkward moments?He started singing I Got You Babe. There was a five-second lag – it was pretty drawn out. Good table manners?He poured his drinks with finesse. How long did you stay on the call?Time passed pretty quickly. Around 90 minutes. Best thing about Harry?He seemed to care about obscure details of my life. For example, how I’d successfully baked a lemon meringue pie. Did you introduce him to your housemates?He wanted to meet them, but it was 11pm here, so everybody was in bed. Describe Harry in three wordsA tipsy intellectual. What do you think he made of you?Agreeable, open-minded and radio-friendly. And cute, obviously. Any connection issues?A lag hindered conversation at times. And… did you swap numbers?Yes. How did the date end?We realised that, sadly, the date had run its course. I went to bed. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?My food would have arrived. Marks out of 10?A solid eight. Would you meet again in person?We’d still have to contend with the distance, but if our paths should cross at some point, why not? • To hear more of Harry and Jayson’s date, listen to our collaboration with the Today in Focus podcast. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like‑minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com