Why did they ask me for an essay about stopping writing? And why did I say yes? Did I tell someone I’d stopped? Have I stopped? I could, if I wanted to, couldn’t I? I’m 77 and I’m pretty tired. And lately I think I’ve copped what the French call “un coup de vieux”: a blow of old. I’ve got arthritis in my left wrist, my right knee gives twinges, and my left foot sometimes aches and stabs all day. Other days, nothing hurts at all. I don’t know what this means. I am an old woman. I’ve never written at home, because when I’m hanging round here I keep thinking up tasks, inventing housework, bargaining with my laziness: if I put on a load of washing, for example, 40 minutes later I’ll be allowed to get up from the desk and hang it on the line. So I’ve always rented an office in another suburb, a drab room without wifi where there’s nothing to do except work. It’s spartan, my office; some people might call it grim. I like it very much. But I’m not going there today. It’s summer and the family’s gone away. I’m here on my own, without even the dog. My job is to guard the chooks and the vegetable garden. I know it’s neurotic, but I can’t go out. Somebody might break into the house. Junkies from the flats might climb the back fence and steal the bikes. A northerly might get up and tear the nets off the fruit trees. I have to stay home. Right. The essay. I open the laptop at the kitchen table. Nothing happens. I copy out a ferocious quote from a Rachel Cusk essay I’m reading about the artist’s “inviolable selfishness in the face of other people’s needs”. Don’t want to think about that right now. I chew some sugarless gum and spit it into a torn envelope. I go to the broom cupboard and put on my apron: maybe that’ll make me feel businesslike. Maybe I’ll ask them to put an apron on my coffin, if I ever bloody well die. I turn on the radio. Norman Swan is saying that cognitive decline does not necessarily mean Alzheimer’s. How many years have I got left before I hit the age Mum was when she died of Alzheimer’s? Five years. Four and a bit. At that moment the bloke with the mower and the whipper-snipper charges through the back gate. Cheerfully he puts on his headphones and sets up his tremendous roar. Energised by the proximity of someone else’s manual labour, I start randomly rattling away on the keyboard. I may be an old woman, but I’m not done for yet. *** These days, when in the circumstances I am not getting much done, well-wishers think to comfort one by instancing what one has done already. This is no reassurance. One’s back-catalogue is more of a tribunal. One is arraigned before it and current work (or lack of it) judged. – Alan Bennett, in his 2019 London Review of Books diary. “No, I’m not working on anything.” “Nothing?” “No.” “You don’t want to talk about it?” “It’s not that. There’s nothing to tell. I’m not writing a book, that’s all.” “Oooh. That must be … uhmm … ” “Actually I’ve often gone for quite long periods without writing a book. Years, even.” “Really? But you published that one, that one about the, sorry, I forget its name, the dam one? The murder trial? That wasn’t very long ago, was it?” “Couple of years ago, yes.” “But haven’t you been at any interesting trials lately? Have you been at the court?” “No.” “But you love courts! I heard you say that in an interview! Or was it in a magazine?” “Yes. I do love courts.” “So there isn’t a trial that you’re interested in going to?” “Not right now, no.” *** Last year my ears started to pack up. If someone in conversation made a gesture that covered her mouth I would slap her hand away. In court I leaned forward, turned my head this way and that, strained in vain. I went to an audiologist. The tests were humiliating: I had to repeat sentences spoken by a voice that kept getting fainter and fainter until all I could say, miserably, over and over, was “No. No. No.” I got hearing aids. They cost an arm and a leg. In court they were no help at all. Too much ambient noise. The cop in front of me scratched his neck and I thought someone was sawing wood. Water gushed into a glass in a gurgling torrent. Counsel’s brilliant submissions were mouths opening and shutting and a harsh nasal stream of vowels. I spent a couple more days in the county and magistrates courts, striving and failing to follow, and emerged from that spectacle of weakness and woe with a broken heart and no story. That’s when I threw in the towel. My life as an amateur journalist was over. Months later I put on my overcoat and found in one of its pockets a small square of paper on which someone had neatly printed, “Helen Garner. Nail clipper x 1. Tweezer x 1,” dated it and signed his name. It was the receipt from security at Broadmeadows magistrates court. My confiscated items must still be out there at Broadie, in a locker or a drawer. I’ll keep that slip of paper forever, to prove to myself that I really did try to keep going. *** Years ago, in one of those moments of self-hatred that can overcome a woman whose marriage is about to blow up in her face, I asked the man in my life if he thought I was lazy. “No,” he said coolly. “I think you’re a hard-working little money-making machine.” And I was. For 40 years, between books, I wrote freelance journalism. I always had a deadline hanging over me and I loved it: it fed my anxiety, my driven nature. But the years went by, and I grew older. I became a hands-on grandmother. The work I had done began to amount to something. I had a backlist in print. I won a couple of generous awards. Money came to me from people who had died – my parents, and a woman who was a silent benefactor to me and to certain other artists of this country. The tight link between work and money loosened, and fell away. Now, when an editor offers me work, I don’t have to do it. I can open my mouth, and take a breath, and say no. At long last, I’m free. I’m out here, floating. This is the worst possible thing that could happen to a person like me. *** The thing about writing for publication is that it’s intimately connected with time. You’re always pointed at a future. Someone’s depending on you, waiting for you – probably tapping his foot and looking at his watch, breathing out sharply through his nose, only just holding back a roar of impatience. (My father? Still?) And if that deadline is removed, or so you think, everything will fracture, or go saggy and shapeless. How will I pass the day? Why will I get up in the morning? And what about the things that are swarming all around at me at every moment? Who’s going to see them, record them, save them from oblivion? How will the world continue to exist if I don’t keep writing about it? What I really mean is: How will I stay alive, if I stop writing? Oh, for God’s sake, woman, calm down. Mary Oliver has it covered: “What about all the little stones, sitting alone in the moonlight? … What about the grass?” Again and again she writes about learning to love the world. Is that what I’m trying to get at here? *** Last year I published Yellow Notebook (Text), a diary that I kept in the 1970s and 1980s. Back then I never thought of it as publishable work. In fact I never thought of it as work at all. I wrote it to clear my head, to keep a record of things I didn’t want to forget, to calm myself before I went to sleep. But mostly I wrote it for the hell of it, because I really love writing. I mean, I love a pen and paper. I love words and sentences, and the way you can knit them together and shift them around and pile them up and spread them out. I love the way the raw material of an ordinary day doesn’t start to reveal its deeper meaning until you’ve got the pen in your hand and you’re halfway down the page. Someone remarked that a lot of the entries “could have been the starts of novels”. I’d had the same thought, while I was editing the old exercise books, and it surprised me. Often I asked myself why I had let this or that incident get past me, why I hadn’t followed it to wherever it might have led, and dug out its potential riches. But the force that draws a writer to one story rather than another does not tap politely at the front door. It shoots an invisible arrow into some murky region of the writer’s unknown needs, and hits a target she didn’t even know was there. That’s when the trouble starts. You have to believe, against the scornful trumpeting of your intellect, in the miraculous ability of form to create itself out of chaos. You have to hold the line through all the wretched days, months, even years that you spend not writing – doing anything but write: “wasting time”, indulging in displacement activities, wandering about pointlessly, biting people’s heads off, seething with anxiety and self-reproach. You have to believe that you’re preparing the ground for something to manifest out of the darkness, to present itself, to be born. Having already gone through this process countless times does not help. You forget, every single time, that it’s coming at you. The anxiety, the self-reproach are always total, unremitting, inescapable. You have to submit to it, allow yourself to suffer it, right to the end. How melodramatic it sounds. Almost laughable. But every writer I know would recognise that description, and shudder. So perhaps, after all, it would be a relief if it never came to me again, that sharp little secret arrow. Do I really miss it, or am I glad to be spared? Will I be spared? While I’m waiting for the answer, quietly growing wearier and achier and deafer, a great treasure is being offered to me daily, a humble glory on a platter, right here in front of me, under my nose. “Are you going to keep on writing about us?” says my 15-year-old grandson in the kitchen, dashing off the crossword that I have cursed and abandoned. “I don’t know.” I look up guiltily. “Would you rather I stopped?” A long pause. “No,” he says, with his philosophical smile. “I don’t think you should stop.” “Why not?” “Because,” butts in his 12-year-old brother, bouncing his football in a forceful rhythm, “it shows – that we – exist.” • This is an edited extract from Helen Garner’s essay in Griffith Review 68: Getting On ($27.99) 