What were you hoping for?Romance and an injection of excitement to jolt me out of my lockdown routine. First impressions?She’s a babe, with a backdrop worthy of a cabinet minister. What did you talk about?Our top pubs, her time in New York, mine in Indonesia, murder mysteries (both classic and involving tigers), tactics for making friends with neighbours. Any awkward moments?I don’t think I made much sense while falling asleep on the sofa at the end. It runs in the family is my only excuse. Good table manners?Impeccable. Either she is a quick eater or I was too focused on my saag paneer because I never actually saw her Chinese food. How long did you stay on the call?Until just past 11. We moved on to sofas for Pictionary and quizzing. Best thing about Olivia?She is a really genuine person, which made it easy for me to relax into the date. Did you introduce her to your housemates?Yes, my housemate played waiter in exchange for a cut of the food and an attempt to score a date with her housemate. Describe Olivia in three wordsAnimated. Alluring. Astute. What do you think she made of you?I took it as a compliment that I reminded her of a cop from Line Of Duty. I just hope my lockdown haircut didn’t count against me. Any connection issues?None. Plus we have the most unlikely mutual connection to Saskatoon University hospital in Canada. And… did you swap numbers?Yes. How did the call end?Rushing back to our tables to stage the selfie we forgot earlier on! If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Established social norms for how to end a video call gracefully. Marks out of 10?9. Would you meet again in person?I would like to. What were you hoping for?To speak to a person other than my housemate, and for my rubbish wifi to stay connected. First impressions?All I remember was it suddenly hit me I was on a Guardian Blind date in the middle of a global pandemic. What did you talk about?Corrupt police tigers, our kimchi-making housemates, the fact that Angus is named after a blue Mini from Aberdeen, and Quidditch. Any awkward moments?When I disappeared for ages to try to figure out how to use Uber Eats. Good table manners?He was a saint for waiting an hour for my food to arrive, while his curry sat in the oven. How long did you stay on the call?A respectable four hours. Best thing about Angus?He was really fun to chat to, and he laughed at my jokes (even the Line Of Duty ones, and he hasn’t seen Line Of Duty). Did you introduce him to your housemates?He briefly met Emily, when she came to help with my food ordering crisis. Describe Angus in three wordsPatient, fun and thoughtful. What do you think he made of you?Probably that I’m a bit too enthusiastic about Poirot and should tone down the sarcasm. Any connection issues?At the beginning, the connection was so bad, I couldn’t understand anything Angus was saying. And… did you swap numbers?Yes, so he could get my approval on a screenshot selfie. How did the call end?With a discussion on whether we’d see each other again. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?That I’d figured out how to order the food beforehand. Marks out of 10?8. Would you meet again in person?Yep, Angus has never been to a taproom; that needs to be resolved. • Self-isolation doesn’t mean you have to stop looking for love, and Blind Date will continue with online video dates. If you’re single and would like to be set up (with a takeaway on us), email blind.date@theguardian.com If you’re looking to meet someone like‑minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com