Ramzan Kadyrov, the strongman leader of the southern Russian republic of Chechnya, has not been seen publicly in the 24 hours since Russian state media said he had been hospitalised in Moscow with coronavirus symptoms. While online sleuths have sought to track planes or motorcades that may have ferried Chechnya’s leader in Moscow, local officials have either declined to give information about his whereabouts or health or opted to troll journalists who have asked. Experts on the region said that Kadyrov’s status was unclear but that hiding an illness would fit a wider strategy of minimising problems in Chechnya, particularly when reporting to the Kremlin. “Kadyrov is a hostage of his own PR, he is caught by his own approach, which doesn’t allow him to recognise problems in Chechnya,” said Grigory Shvedov, editor of the Caucasian Knot, an independent news agency reporting on the North Caucasus region. “He reports to the Kremlin that everything is fine in Chechnya… and he is a hostage of this report.” Kadyrov’s online accounts – those that haven’t been blocked – have mostly remained dormant, issuing just a single birthday message that reads like a press release to Russia’s defence minister, Sergey Shoygu. After weeks of frenetic, sometimes bizarre, appearances in Chechnya, Kadyrov has disappeared. If he is confirmed to be sick, it would mark the seventh and arguably most significant illness of a high-level Russian official in the Covid-19 pandemic so far. Kadyrov, who was installed by Vladimir Putin in 2007 in order to quell a simmering insurgency, has sought to portray himself as irreplaceable to the region’s stability. For critics, it was a chance to ask wryly why he wouldn’t stay for treatment in Chechnya, where he had recently called doctors the “best in the world”. His most recent public appearance came last week, in a heavily edited video of him chairing a meeting on his government’s coronavirus response. In April, he had performed stunts such as donning a yellow jumpsuit to visit a hospital treating coronavirus patients, or shaving his head after being asked to reopen local barber shops. Other Chechen officials soon followed suit. He had also attacked the newspaper Novaya Gazeta after a reporter wrote that the region’s measures to isolate those suspected of being infected were so severe that some were hiding from the police. In the course of the crisis, Kadyrov has oscillated from macho posturing, telling Chechens not to fear the disease in late March, to enforcing one of Russia’s toughest quarantine regimes, at least on paper. On Thursday, Russian state news agencies reported that he had flown to Moscow and was now in hospital with coronavirus symptoms. And Baza, the internet agency that had correctly broken the news of the Russian prime minister, Mikhail Mishustin, being ill, said there had been damage to Kadyrov’s lungs. Chechnya has stood out in the North Caucasus during the coronavirus epidemic for its low reported number of deaths. In neighbouring Dagestan, deaths from coronavirus and pneumonia are thought to have passed 700, but Chechnya has continued to post rock-bottom numbers that have raised questions, Shvedov said. The government has claimed they were a result of early quarantine measures. But a recent protest at a hospital in Gudermes, where doctors said there was not enough PPE, could indicate that Chechnya is facing similar problems to other regions and that “fear towards coronavirus is stronger than their fear of Kadyrovtsy [paramilitaries who protect Kadyrov]”, Shvedov said. Three nurses and two doctors later apologised on Chechen state television for the protest. Kadyrov later said they should be fired. In news reports and official press releases, Kadyrov has sought to portray himself as irreplaceable in controlling Chechnya, making any kind of extended absence a dangerous prospect. Without directly denying reports of Kadyrov’s hospitalisation, an aide said his headquarters remained “under his personal control”. Meanwhile there are images of Kadyrov breaking his own quarantine, making it a potentially sensitive moment if he must now admit he has fallen ill. “If at some point he needs to show he is a human being and he might be ill, even seriously ill, it becomes really complicated to show the real picture,” Shvedov said.