At 5.24pm on 14 September 2014, Stephen King tweeted: “Watching a cool British series called Peaky Blinders.” Until then, TV shows from Birmingham were not cool. Pebble Mill at One, Crossroads, The Golden Shot and Citizen Khan were many things but cool wasn’t one of them. Peaky Blinders tore up the playbook from its first scene, when Cillian Murphy rode into shot like Clint Eastwood minus poncho, but plus tweed suit and matching cap. Director Otto Bathurst said his aim was to create something like Blade Runner set in post-first world war Birmingham and he did so in that opening shot, with flames decorously bursting from a factory furnace to backlight Murphy’s equestrian silhouette and ash falling through the air like snowflakes. Enter Tommy Shelby, boss of the eponymous Small Heath gang whose members had just returned from the trenches and were now bent on controlling Birmingham’s mean streets. The result? Not so much a spaghetti western as a Spaghetti Junction western. Even to locals, it didn’t matter that Murphy’s Brummie accent was scarcely more plausible than Timothy Spall’s in Auf Wiedersehen, Pet, or that Helen McCrory as the Shelby family matriarch got into character by watching Ozzy Osbourne videos. Steven Knight’s drama depicted a city in ferment, with secretary of war Winston Churchill so worried about Brummie Bolshevik revolution that he dispatched a special branch force to restore law and order. Peaky Blinders was, for a moment, a valuable antidote to the near-contemporaneous Downton Abbey: the voice of prole upstarts rather than toff lickspittles. Tastemakers as unlikely as Brad Pitt, David Bowie, Snoop Dogg, Julia Roberts and Ed Sheeran were fans. A merchandising boom followed, with Peaky Blinder beers and soaring demand for herringbone tweeds, newsboy caps and collarless Henley shirts. By season four, however, Peaky nose-dived into cliche. Moody horse rides across the wild West Midlands to Nick Cave’s Red Right Hand? Check. A six-abreast Reservoir Dogs strut across cobbles? Check. Murphy as a mash-up of Al Pacino and Ronnie Barker, trying futilely to cast off his criminal past as the former attempted in The Godfather Part III and the latter tried in Going Straight? Check. In a Britain struggling with knife crime, celebrating a gang that settled its disputes by producing razors from flat cap peaks seemed excessive. McCrory has even admitted that she can’t watch the show’s extreme violence. Tommy Shelby mutated from plausible historical fictional character to Zelig in a potboiler. At the end of season four he was elected as Labour MP for a made-up constituency, a cynical narrative device to ensure he attended every interesting historical event in interwar Britain and one that tarnished the second city’s proud history of Labour MPs from Clare Short and Denis Howell to Jess Phillips and Preet Gill. Filming on season six has apparently stalled. Perhaps that is a good thing – for all that the show briefly redeemed Birmingham on telly, we have now reached peak Peaky.