The writer and activist Elie Wiesel once remarked that the opposite of love is not hate, but indifference. Superficially at least, we seem to have taken his admonition to heart – particularly now, as the Covid-19 pandemic forces us to find new ways of balancing isolation with solidarity. For perhaps the only time in our lives, we can mobilise and participate simply by remaining at home. The contribution of individual behavioural changes to the management of a global crisis – which ordinarily feels dispiritingly small – can now be graphed practically in real time. To isolate is, in a very real sense, to care. The problem, though, is that we’ve been conditioned into publicly expressing our care. Coaxed through social media into a perpetual state of display, we seem to fear that silence and indifference are synonymous. The act of caring about something – a cause, a tragedy, a crisis – is intimately bound up with how we communicate that care. In isolation, no one can see our concern, and we can’t gauge the commitment of others. As a result, our faith in each other becomes fragile. This fear that private concern might be read as indifference explains our growing taste for public performances of commitment: fundraising laps in restricted spaces; a weekly clap for the NHS. Even as these moments of shared sentiment are ritualised, they inflame an underlying discomfort: lockdown feels very much like captivity. What if, rather than choosing to stay home in the interests of the greater good, we have in fact been kept at home? When escape is a dangerous proposition, we take the easier route, flipping the role of prisoner by casting ourselves as its opposite: the cop. Playing cop solves all of our problems at once. Not only do we shake off captivity by assuming the authority of a guard, we also conveniently communicate to everyone around us just how much we care – about health workers, pensioners, the finer points of social distancing. A hierarchy of virtue and significance emerges. There are those who simply stay home; there are those who stay home but also join in with organised displays of support and solidarity; and there are those who care so much they post aggressive signs in parks and pap commuters on their way to work. By being one of these latter people, we might think, we are surely among the least indifferent members of society. If we are the least indifferent then we must also be, by definition, the most loving. This is the tricky thing about love: it often manifests as fear. When we love someone, we fear their indifference. When we love a community, even a country, we fear that its decay or development will leave no place for us. With love, there is always a border, a place where what we love meets what is excluded. We soothe our fear by hardening our borders. We harden our borders by policing them. Compassion blurs with control. Soon, anything that addresses our fear – expanded police powers, tougher punishments – sounds uncannily like the language of love. As we slowly begin to leave lockdown, our feelings about this period of our lives will change. We will emerge, those of us lucky enough to be safe where we were, into an altered and unstable world. What felt like confinement will feel, quite suddenly, like an embrace – a time when urgency and productivity were suspended; when there was little or no need to encounter strangers, with all their unpredictable, unmanageable behaviours. We were held in place, and it felt like being protected. As the familiar spaces of our world – our hair salons and train platforms, our garden centres and dreary offices – gradually repopulate, we will be forced once again to co-exist. Because we will be out of the habit, our contact with each other will feel messy, unpredictable, dangerous. Far from rejoicing in our new-found freedoms, we may very well be terrified. Desperate for authority to reassure us with firm management, we find only conflicting messages, indecipherable infographics, empty exhortations to “stay alert”. If the government can’t control the virus, what are we to do but control each other? The success of post-lockdown life, then, will depend not so much on negotiating the baffling minutiae of social distancing than as on balancing and pacifying our own most troubling instinct. Otherwise, at the very moment a better world becomes possible, we risk creating a worse one: a world of petty resentments and roiling suspicions, where we not only log into an app to report our symptoms and movements, but to alert the authorities to the unmasked excursions and menacing coughs of our neighbours; where our social media feeds are just a rogue’s gallery of strangers’ transgressions; where we not only keep our distance, but demand, violently, that distance is kept from us. This narrowly interpersonal emphasis is a convenient distortion of reality. Our current state of failure hasn’t sprung solely from minor infractions. We’re not faced with the worst death toll in Europe because your neighbour went twice to the park instead of once, or because someone two doors down flouted the rules to pursue an affair. We’re mired in catastrophe as a direct result of the very thing our twee public merriment and furious finger-wagging hopes to obscure: the decades-long shadow of our structural indifference. What we’re experiencing at the hands of Covid-19 is nothing less than the exposure of our compassion’s limits. Every fissure of inequality has become a vector of contagion. Those who most need protection have been left unprotected. Those most in need of shelter have been denied it. Those already on the precipice of precarity have tipped, unaided, into crisis. Generations of health inequalities, divided along strata of race, income and class have culminated in a grossly uneven distribution of suffering and mortality. Even the unchecked pollution in the air we breathe may have served as a vehicle for the virus. Our most cruelly policed borders – between who is cared for and who is excluded; who is counted and who is forgotten – are now gaping wounds. As we reckon with grief on an unimaginable scale, tragedy must serve as revelation. It will be no good directing our fear and need for order towards our neighbours and colleagues. Punishment will not bring healing. We will need, instead, to confront the yawning irony at the heart of our modern lives: the fact that, though each of us cares, though each of us is at pains to show that we care, we have nonetheless shaped a society that doesn’t care at all. What we have made together has failed us. We must mourn its failure, and then channel our grief into rage, not at each other, but at the callously indifferent systems whose power we mistook for love. • Sam Byers is the author of Come Join our Disease, Perfidious Albion and Idiopathy