I don’t want to be part of this madness (Opening schools could fuel coronavirus spread, DfE adviser admits, 13 May). I love my job, care deeply about the pupils, and am desperate to be back. However, schools can’t open at any price. I am a teacher working in an infant and nursery school. Since schools were closed I have been in, on a rota basis, caring for up to 20 pupils aged between two and seven years. It has become clear during this time that it is utterly unmanageable to make the setting safe, while catering for the children’s needs. Many of our pupils are vulnerable, and the idea of opening our doors to them in two weeks’ time, to rooms with unfamiliar adults (in order to keep them in the recommended groups of 15), with minimal resources (in order to comply with recommendations regarding cleaning and materials such as no wooden toys, no play-dough, no sand, nothing that can’t be easily cleaned), with staggered start times, play times, lunch times and home times, will be unsettling at best, and traumatic at worst. How do we teach our children, or keep them engaged, without resources that make this possible during “normal” school? How do we comfort a child who is distressed? How do 120 children use six toilets without being near each other? How do they spend their day together, but not together? My husband is a paramedic. If he doesn’t work, someone might die. I worry constantly about our most vulnerable pupils, and have been doing everything I can, along with my brilliant school team, to support them at home. But if I carry the virus from my husband into work, and my 15 pupils carry it back to their homes, then I have failed them. Someone might die because I went to work. I am awaiting further advice from my union, but I may refuse to work on 1 June because it is unsafe. Hundreds of people are still dying every day. It is too soon. I will continue to work as hard as I possibly can to support our children learning at home, but I will not go to work because someone tells me to, when every part of me is screaming no. It is my social responsibility not to participate in this madness.Sarah HumplebyBuxton, Derbyshire • I am the mother of a dedicated primary school teacher who has worked throughout the lockdown, going into school regularly, making up food parcels as well as delivering them to the families of vulnerable children. She has at no time been provided with PPE. On attending school in the lockdown, my daughter had to resort to using gloves from a garage. Teachers are expected to go back into schools from 1 June, yet there is still no information about what PPE will be made available to them, nor how realistically they can manage things safely in a community of small children and their parents. Teachers have been offered tests if they display coronavirus symptoms, but my daughter, an asthmatic, may well die if she catches the virus, and testing offers little comfort. I know that most teachers will do whatever is called for to educate children safely, but it appears they are at the bottom of the list of people to be given attention by this government and that they are regarded as carers and no more than a means to allow the parents to get back to work.Jenny OwenSt Albans, Hertfordshire • When schools finally reopen (Teachers can legally refuse to return to school over health risk, says union, 15 May), will the curriculum include PPE as well as PE?Stan LabovitchWindsor, Berkshire• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters