I’m self-isolating alone, but, for five nights a fortnight, I have my children, Albert, eight, and Esme, six, to stay. We just watched a Japanese animation film called The Tale of the Princess Kaguya, which left the three of us completely spellbound, and my son in tears. It’s based on a 10th-century Japanese folktale called The Tale of the Bamboo Cutter, who finds a tiny child in the bamboo who he raises with his wife. She’s a child of the moon but suffers the heartbreaks of being human, and when she’s called back to the moon, she doesn’t want to leave. It’s got things in common with Blade Runner. I watch very little television because it’s my job, so it’s a bit of a busman’s holiday. I don’t tend to watch much drama because I make it, so I know all the smoke and mirrors and I find it very difficult to spend my disbelief. I tend to stick to documentaries. I’m watching OJ: Made in America for the second time; it’s nearly eight hours long. It’s a portrait of an individual – OJ Simpson – and of race in America. It’s an account of Los Angeles, a corrupt judicial system and a grotesque miscarriage of justice. It’s a commentary on racial politics in America. It’s an absolute masterpiece. It came on in the middle of the night on BBC Four, and I just had to watch it again. I’m particularly interested that America has so much sway over our lives. I think it’s fair to say that without Donald Trump there would be no Boris Johnson. The idea of a celebrity moron becoming the most powerful person in the country was patented by the US. It’s also a portrait of celebrity in America. The idea that you can buy justice is something I think we all need to be aware of. I’m also watching Mike Judge Presents: Tales from the Tour Bus. He’s the guy who created Beavis and Butt-Head. It’s an animated history of American music. I’ve particularly enjoyed the ones on Bootsy Collins and George Clinton as I’m a big fan of black American music. I recommend it to anybody. • Christopher Eccleston stars in The A Word, on BBC One.