Art conceived in the name of charity does not have the strongest track record; those with a mind for cultural ephemera wince at the memory of such fundraising musical singles as We Are the World and Do They Know It’s Christmas?. Though these projects may have been organized under the objective of providing aid at a time of desperate need, their maudlin self-satisfaction could not stand up to scrutiny under the usual rubrics used to critique any other release. And so this was the specific strain of dread that Parks and Recreation fans brought to the news of a reunion episode hastily coordinated in order to put together donations for Feeding America, a nonprofit funding a vast network of pantries, soup kitchens and other community-based centers. A show that often lapsed into corniness in its later years seemed primed to return drenched in high-fructose corn syrup with an extra-hefty helping of creamed corn on the side. Add to that the larger political incongruence of a distinctly Obama-era relic reviving itself in the festering dystopia of Trumpism, and the stage was set for a decently-intended minor debacle. What a relief, then, that this “episode” (a term here used loosely to refer to a collection of stitched-together self-taped dialogues recorded from the cast’s respective quarantines) should turn out to be nothing more than it has to – a collection of timely jokes that connect more often than they don’t, reacquainting us in a low-stakes manner with the characters fans have been missing. Things may have changed, faces have developed a few new lines, but the writing staff understands that ultimately it’s just nice to have the gang back together. They let the ensemble bounce off each other without letting external factors get in the way. Most significantly, the reunion episode sheds the political conscience that wedged the regular series into the zeitgeist during the previous presidential administration. A sunny can-do liberalism became Leslie Knope and co’s calling card, an attitude that could not possibly be more out of joint in light of America’s slide into soft fascism and the utter failure of the Democratic party to halt it in any meaningful way. The notion of a cameo from Knope favorite Joe Biden, currently the subject of much discussion regarding accusations of sexual assault, was enough to turn any registered voter’s stomach. Mercifully, the show conceived as “a comedy version of The West Wing” now comes to us from a world without Bidens or Clintons or Trumps, its comedy unsullied by commentary at a time when we all just need a laugh. And so the joke writers do what they do best, and get back to writing jokes. We start with a celebrity pop-in of the welcome variety, with Paul Rudd reprising pampered heir Bobby Newport at his family’s private fox-hunting estate in Switzerland, where he “hasn’t caught any yet – they’re so fast, like zoop! And they’re gone!” After warning of the dangers related to “the coronus”, he turns it over to our pals from Pawnee, who are of course all taking the proper precautions. Their individual check-ins form the logical extension of those “what would X-sitcom’s characters be doing under quarantine?” articles, giving each character a moment fitting what we know about them to our new status quo. Adam Scott’s Ben Wyatt has combined his two great passions by writing a script for a Cones of Dunshire claymation movie, as “punishingly dense” as the board game inspiring it. He’s isolating separately from wife Leslie, who makes the most pointed comment while mentioning that it was “sad, but necessary” that she had to shut down every national park. She’s done her part by starting a bunch of committees and organizing a phone tree, which gives structure to this series of video calls conducted under the in-universe platform of Gryzzl. Once viewers get acclimated to the disjointed comic pacing that results from no two actors sharing the same space, it’s harmless fun. It’s like visiting your hometown to find everything right where you left it, a bit sweet and a bit sad. Nick Offerman’s Ron Swanson still loves meat, and gets one of the biggest laughs by reminding us of the hysterical matrimonial dynamic at play in the Offerman-Mullally household. As wannabe baller Tom Haverford, Aziz Ansari still fixates on seeming with it, name-checking Fortnite and using background filters to place himself in a faux Bali. Dedicated nurse Ann Perkins (Rashida Jones) is on the frontlines, and must quarantine in a “different part of the house” from her husband, Chris Traeger (Rob Lowe), as he donates blood four times each day. Retta’s ever-elegant Donna Meagle situates herself in front of a wall of chromatically arranged sneakers. Aubrey Plaza and Chris Pratt, their careers having risen most precipitously in the years since the finale, get the least to do. We learn that the Luddgate-Dwyer household has a drum set, but most importantly, Pratt leads the stirring sing-along of Bye Bye, Li’l Sebastian that takes us out. It’s an easy way to conclude with something momentous and cathartic, and yet far from the worst-case scenario as to how this could’ve all gone. The episode succeeds by allowing itself to be little more than a half-hour of humor. It’s never better than when crafting great setups and punchlines for the tertiary faces making quick appearances. (Boozy newswoman Joan Calamezzo has an EGOT because she has been kicked out of all four major awards ceremonies; cologne magnate Dennis Feinstein markets a scent called Miracle Cure; fan-beloved Jean-Ralphio claims to have been “banned from Cameo” for recording his videos naked.) By that same tack, the weakest moment comes when the episode adopts an about-face for the lines: “Things will go back to normal. They just have to.” Most Americans have made their peace with the fact that things will most definitely not snap back to normal when this all ends, and that by no means do they “have to.” In a lesser world, the episode would have been ripe with hollow feel-good platitudes like that one, but someone knew better. As Preston Sturges teaches us by the conclusion of Sullivan’s Travels, people living in times of hardship don’t need to be preached to. We just need a break from all the damned stress, and Pawnee’s finest happily obliged.