A few years before I stopped cooking meat, I would make pork, apple and fennel sausage rolls and take them to just about every house party or social event, because they were so well loved and requested. I’ve quietly subbed in these vegan ones now, and while they taste a little different, the requests keep coming. I make them using textured vegetable protein (TVP) which, if you’ve never cooked with it before, will rock your world. It soaks up whatever liquid it is cooked in, so it’s the perfect vessel for any flavourful sauce. It is very inexpensive and can be bought in bulk and stored forever. You’ll find it in most good health food shops, but if you can’t track it down, just use 300 g (10½ oz) vegan mince or crumbled firm tofu and leave out the stock. Makes 30 party-sized sausage rolls To make the rolls3 sheets vegan puff pastry3 tbsp nut milk of choice (or 1 egg, beaten)Fennel seeds, for sprinkling (optional)Tomato sauce or chutney, to serve To make the ‘sausage’2 tbsp olive oil1 brown onion, finely diced3 garlic cloves, crushed85g walnuts, finely chopped10 sage leaves, finely sliced1 apple, grated1 tbsp Worcestershire sauce1 tbsp soy sauce1 tsp smoked paprika1 tsp dried thyme leaves3 tbsp nutritional yeast90g dried TVP (textured vegetable protein)375 ml vegetable stock100g breadcrumbs3 tbsp finely chopped parsley (optional) To prepare the “sausage” mince, heat the olive oil in a large, heavy-based saucepan. Add the onion and cook over low heat for about 10 minutes, stirring often, until browned and translucent. Add the garlic, walnuts and sage, along with a little salt and some cracked pepper. Cook for a further few minutes. Stir in the apple, Worcestershire sauce, soy sauce, paprika, thyme and nutritional yeast and turn the heat up to medium. Cook for a few minutes, until searing hot. Add the TVP and stock and stir well to combine. Bring the mixture to a simmer and cook for 2–3 minutes, to give the TVP a chance to soak up the liquid. Turn the heat off and add the breadcrumbs, and parsley if using. Stir well to combine. Taste the mixture and add seasoning to taste. Let the mixture cool for about 30 minutes, until cool enough to handle. Preheat the oven to 180°C (350°F). Line a large baking tray with baking paper. Cut each sheet of pastry in half to make two rectangles. Place one-sixth of the filling mixture in the centre of each piece of pastry, shaping it into a long sausage lengthways down the pastry sheet. Firmly fold over the pastry sheet, and in one swift movement, roll it into a tight long roll, so the edge is on the bottom. Repeat with all the remaining pastry and filling. Cut each roll into five equal pieces (or into two for larger rolls). Lay them on the baking tray with a little space between each one. Brush a little nut milk onto each roll and sprinkle with fennel seeds, if desired. Bake for 20 minutes, or until the pastry is golden and puffy. Serve warm, with tomato sauce or chutney. Warm, simple and so very comforting—who doesn’t crave a good hearty pie every so often? Curry powder, mustard seeds and coconut give this one a lovely subtle curry aroma, but you could also flavour the filling with other herbs and spices you have on hand. The flavour is even better a day or so after making the pie, so it’s a great meal to cook up on the weekend to keep you going on busy weeknights. Serves 8 700g starchy potatoes, peeled and cut into 2cm cubes700g sweet potatoes, peeled and cut into 2 cm cubes3 tbsp olive oil400ml (14 fl oz) tin coconut milk1 large brown onion, diced3 carrots, diced3 celery stalks, diced300g mushrooms, diced4 garlic cloves, crushed2 tsp mustard seeds1 tbsp curry powder2 tbsp Worcestershire sauce3 × 400g tins brown lentils400g tin chopped tomatoes300g frozen peas½ bunch dill, choppedFresh herbs, black sesame seeds or crispy fried onions, to serve (optional) Place the potato and sweet potato cubes in a large saucepan and cover with cold water. Bring to the boil over medium heat and cook until the vegetables are soft and tender. Drain off the water. Add half the olive oil to the pan, along with one-third of the coconut milk and a generous seasoning of salt and pepper. Mash the mixture until smooth, then set aside. Meanwhile, heat the remaining olive oil in a large saucepan. Add the onion, carrots and celery, season with salt and pepper and cook for 10 minutes over medium heat, stirring often. Once the vegetables are browning and tender, add the mushrooms, garlic, mustard seeds and curry powder. Cook, stirring often, for another 5–10 minutes. Add the Worcestershire sauce, lentils (including the liquid in the tins), tomatoes and remaining coconut milk. Bring the mixture to a simmer and cook for 10–15 minutes, or until thick and aromatic. Turn off the heat, then add the peas and dill and mix to combine. Pour the lentil mixture into a large baking dish. Spoon the sweet potato mixture over the top and use a spatula to spread it almost to the edges. Bake for 20 minutes, or until the topping is golden. Serve sprinkled with fresh herbs, sesame seeds or crispy fried onions if desired. Peanut butter and honey on toast was my comfort breakfast and snack of choice as a kid, and it’s still a flavour combination I adore now. These brownies are incredible: the perfect pick-me-up or treat for someone you love. Cook a lot — everyone will want some. Makes 20 brownies 200g (7 oz) crunchy peanut butter3 tbsp milk2 tbsp honey225g plain (all-purpose) flour, or 200g almond meal1 tsp baking powder90g good-quality cocoa powder100g butter, softened125ml vegetable oil345g caster sugar165g brown sugar2 tsp natural vanilla extract4 eggs150g dark chocolate chunks or chips½ tsp sea salt flakes Preheat the oven to 180°C. Line a large baking dish with baking paper. Put the peanut butter, milk and honey in a small saucepan over low heat. Stir gently to combine, until the mixture becomes thick and a little darker. Turn off the heat and set aside. Mix the flour, baking powder and cocoa together in a bowl. In a large bowl, beat together the butter, vegetable oil, caster sugar and brown sugar for two to four minutes, or until thick and pale. Add the vanilla, then beat in the eggs one at a time, beating well after each addition. Add the flour mixture and gently stir until just combined, then fold the chocolate chips through. Pour the batter into the lined baking dish. Spoon the peanut butter mixture over the top, swirling it to distribute evenly. Sprinkle the sea salt flakes on top. Bake for 25–30 minutes, or until the batter is just set and no longer wobbly. Be careful not to overcook, to ensure the brownies have a fudgy consistency. Allow to cool before slicing the brownies. Best eaten fresh, with a cold glass of milk. Extracted from The Shared Table by Clare Scrine, published by Smith Street Books, RRP AU$39.99. Photography, design and layout: Savannah van der Niet/Savvy Creative, Cover Design: Michelle Mackintosh, Food Styling: Clare Scrine, Prop Styling: Issy FitzSimons-Reilly and Monika Correa