France is set to end eight weeks of strict lockdown as the government urged people to behave responsibly to avoid a sudden spike in coronavirus cases. Hours before the national déconfinement there were reports of two new Covid-19 clusters in départments designated green – areas where the virus has largely stopped circulating and where most restrictions are being lifted. Many of the country’s primary and nursery schools are gearing up to restart classes this week, while people will be able to leave home without having to carry sworn attestations. Business are being encouraged to open but staggering working hours to avoid crowding on public transport and in offices. The Paris region – which remains designated red because of the continuing threat from the virus – will remain under stricter regulation and workers are being encouraged to continue working from home where possible. Anyone using public transport will be required to wear a mask and peak-hour metros, buses and trams are reserved for essential workers. While many were happy to see the end of the “stay home” rule others were more cautious. France has had more than 139,000 confirmed cases of coronavirus, resulting in at least 26,300 deaths, according to official figures. An Ifop poll in Le Parisien  suggested 65% of French people believe a cautious approach is more important than a rapid return to normal life. At the same time, 58% believe the economic crisis sparked by Covid-19 is the biggest risk to the country. On the busy rue des Martyrs in Paris’s central 9th arrondissement, shoppers welcomed the end of the lockdown but urged caution. “I think the difference is going to be mainly psychological,” said Noémi Bélanger, 44, an insurance company employee who will continue working from home. She is still waiting to learn if her children will return to school this week. “It will be nice to be able to leave the house without justifying why, stay out longer than an hour and start seeing friends again,” she said. “But it’s not like life will be normal again. I don’t think we’ll all suddenly start inviting each other round again. Cafes and restaurants are still shut, parks are closed. It’ll all take time. People feel a little bit nervous.” Anthony Gaubert, 34, who runs a web marketing company, said: “The virus is still very active in the Paris region. We should all be careful, or we’ll be going straight back into lockdown.” Annie Poquelin, 71, said: “Of course everything has to start up again … but look, the masks, the hand gel, shop assistants behind screens. It’s not like before, is it?” The French government has insisted the return to normal will be “progressive” and ministers have repeatedly urged the population to maintain social distancing and barrier measures. Last week, the prime minister, Édouard Philippe, called on the population to abide by the “spirit” of new regulations, which ban anyone travelling more than 100km outside their départment without a “compelling reason”. However, in Pont-L’Éveque in Normandy, where many city-dwellers have second homes, locals complained Parisians were already breaking the travel rules. “The areas around Pont-L’Éveque have suddenly become inundated with Parisian number plates. Second homes that were closed up are now all opened and the village is teeming,” one local said. “Previously we have seen gendarmes at tolls issue fines, turning people around and sending them back … now friends are seeing Parisians wandering around all over the place.” He added: “With the new clusters breaking out and the insufferable arrogance of many Parisians, I fear we will shortly be changing colour [from green to red].” The person, who did not want to be named, said an elderly couple contracted Covid-19 after a family from Paris “nipped down for an illegal weekend” and asked the local woman to do some cleaning. After two new clusters emerged in the Dordogne and the Vienne départments, officials insisted the country must not lower its guard against the virus. One outbreak in the Dordogne was traced back to the funeral of a 51-year-old man in the small village of L’Eglise-Neuve-de-Vergt – population 500 – south of Périgueux. While only 20 people were invited, dozens more turned turned up to the cemetery and wake, some from Switzerland and Portugal from where the dead man originated. After one person present complained of Covid-19 symptoms, the regional health agency identified, traced and tested a total of 127 people; so far nine have tested positive. The results of 63 tests are still not known. Local prefect Frédéric Périssat said the cluster was an “illustration of what we are hoping not to live through in the next few weeks”. “There’s a slackening off, people gather in a group of 20 or 30 and one person contaminates others,” Périssat said at a press conference. A second cluster was reported at a secondary school in Vienne in south-west France, where four people tested positive after a staff meeting to prepare for the reopening of classes on 18 May. The school is delaying reopening until 27 May. The French lockdown began at noon on 17 March.   