Coffee is good for more than just waking you up in the morning. Before you toss used grounds, consider putting them to use in the garden, around the house, or in bath and body products. Repel garden pests Sprinkle grounds liberally around your plants, or the perimeter of your garden, to deter pests such as ants, slugs, and snails. Invite wormsIf you work the grounds deeper into your soil, you’ll attract these little garden helpers. Boost compostCoffee grounds are rich in nitrogen, so they make excellent green matter. Just add the coffee grounds, along with the filter, directly to your compost pile. Fertilise plants To make a coffee fertiliser, mix old grounds with dead grass clippings, brown leaves, or dry straw, then spread the mixture around acid-loving plants like azaleas, hydrangeas, rhododendrons, and roses. Jump start a harvest To increase the yield of plants such as carrots and radishes, mix dried coffee grounds in with carrot and radish seeds before you plant them. Make a gardener’s soapCoffee granules act as a great abrasive. To make this exfoliating soap, melt one 4oz (113.4 grams) bar of glycerin soap, add 1⁄3 cup coffee grounds, mix well, and pour into a mould to set until it has hardened. You need to use a mould that can withstand the high temperatures of molten soap, and is flexible so the soap can be easily removed. Silicone moulds are ideal for this. The soap will take 12-24 hours to harden. Deodorise your fridgeTo neutralise food odours, fill a jar with grounds and place it, uncovered, at the back of the fridge. Deodorise your hands After chopping garlic or onions, rub grounds on your hands to eliminate odours. Clean tools and cookwareSprinkle coffee grounds onto a scrub brush and use them as an abrasive to remove stuck-on food from pots, pans, and utensils. Remove product build up on hairBefore shampooing, massage a handful of coffee grounds into your hair to remove residue from shampoo, conditioner, and other hair care products. This is an edited extract from Simply Living Well by Julia Watkins, published by Hardie Grant, $34.99 RRP