The prime minister, Boris Johnson, says that from today, people are “actively encouraged” to return to work, although they should continue to work from home if possible. We looked into what would happen if everyone in London tried to go back to their morning commutes while staying 2 metres apart. On a busy day the London Underground carries up to four million passengers. Here’s what that looks like on a normal weekday morning for Clapham North, on the Northern Line. Between 8 and 9am on a normal weekday, 1,005 people press into Clapham North station and get on a train to the centre of London. With 24 trains a hour, an average of 42 get on each train. But if social distancing means that commuters can only sit on alternate seats, and no-one is allowed to stand – by our calculations, only 10% of the people who would normally get a train from this station will be able to board one. In that scenario, only four people instead of 42 will be able to get on each train. Meaning a total of 96 an hour can leave the station. If everyone tried to resume their morning commute, this would leave 909 people waiting outside Clapham North station. The resulting 1.8km queue (leaving 2m between each would-be commuter) would stretch back almost two stops to Clapham South. We use the Northern Line as a well-documented example, but similar effects would be seen across England if users of busy commuter services attempted to go back to normal. Our hypothetical scenario assumes everyone manages to board the carriage with the empty seats, and that access is rationed across stations. (If we didn’t assume that, the socially-distanced train would be full before leaving Morden, the first stop on the line.) We also assume that Transport for London (TfL) will run its maximum service of 24 trains an hour – currently it is running a reduced service of approximately 4 trains an hour and not stopping at all stations. Social distancing has already become a problem on tube trains and stations, with reports of the Jubilee line from east London filling up to pre-pandemic levels on Monday and Tuesday mornings. Plans to enforce social distancing measures require increased staff presence and significant station adjustments. Other forms of transport also face major cuts in capacity, with transport minister Grant Shapps saying that the system nationally could run at only 10% capacity. The government is asking all passengers using public transport to wear face coverings and to avoid touching surfaces, but this will only be effective with social distancing. London’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, says: “I can’t emphasise how important it is that we avoid public transport as much as possible. “If you really must travel, please avoid rush hour, and wear a non-medical facial covering at all times.” The Northern line is the busiest in London, running at 130% capacity on normal weekday mornings between 8-9am. 910 is the official capacity of a Northern Line train at full load (248 passengers seated and 662 standing). At 130% capacity approximately 1183 people would be crammed on each train. That equates to 8.5 people per square metre of standing room – far from the social distancing ideal of one person every 2 metres. If only alternate seats are used, and no-one is allowed to stand, then only 124 passengers will be allowed on each train (half of the 248 seats). That’s only 10% of the peak time number of 1,183, or 14% of the official capacity of 910.