Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: The number of people infected by Covid-19 has exceeded 5.7 million, according to data compiled by the Johns Hopkins University which has tracked the spread of the virus during the pandemic. However, the true number of infections is likely to be much higher, however, given the vast number of unrecorded and asymptomatic cases. The US is home to around 30% of people with the disease around the world, the data shows, way ahead of Brazil (7.2%), Russia (6.6%), the UK (4.7%), Spain (4.1%) and Italy (4%). Boris Johnson announced that from Monday, up to six people will be able to meet outside providing members of different households continue to stay two metres apart. This will be allowed in gardens and other private outdoor spaces, the British prime minister added. Health authorities in the UK reported 377 more deaths from Covid-19, bringing the total official death toll in Europe’s worst-affected country to 37,837. Paris is no longer deemed to be a “red” coronavirus danger zone, the risks posed by the virus moving down a notch to “orange”, France’s prime minister, Édouard Philippe, said. The orange rating means Paris is not as free of the virus as the majority of regions in France designated “green”. However, earlier lockdown measures will still be eased in Paris, with parks in the capital due to reopen next week. Philippe said health results have been good so far as the country prepares to enter a second phase in its relaxation of lockdown rules on 2 June. Deaths from coronavirus in Italy rose by 70 on Thursday, down from 117 on Wednesday, bringing the total to 33,142. There are 47,986 people who are currently suffering from the virus in Italy, down by 2,980 within the last 24 hours. Italy has 231,732 confirmed cases to date. Health officials in Moscow updated their figures on coronavirus deaths. On top of 636 deaths in April directly caused by Covid-19 reported earlier, the Moscow health department added the deaths of 756 people who tested positive for the virus but died of other causes. In 360 of those cases, it noted the coronavirus acted as a catalyst, exacerbating the patients’ conditions and contributing to their deaths. The health department also factored in 169 deaths of people who tested negative but autopsies showed had likely succumbed to the virus. The number of Americans who have lost their jobs in the past 10 weeks soared to more than 40 million as the number of unemployment claims continued to rise with 2.1 million people filing for unemployment last week. The latest figures from the Department of Labor show that the rate of new unemployment claims has continued to fall over the last few weeks, down from its peak in early April, when 6.6 million Americans filed for unemployment in a single week. While the growth of unemployment claims has slowed, millions more have continued to file for unemployment each week, bringing the total number of unemployed to a rate not seen since the Great Depression. New York governor Andrew Cuomo said he would sign an executive order allowing businesses to deny entry to customers who are not wearing masks. He said: “That store owner has a right to protect himself. That store owner has a right to protect the other patrons in that store. “You don’t want to wear a mask, fine. But you don’t have a right to then go into that store if that store-owner doesn’t want you to.” Data from Johns Hopkins University shows that the United States has recorded more than 100,000 deaths from Covid-19, moving past a sombre milestone even as many states relax mitigation measures to stop the spread of the novel coronavirus. The US has recorded more deaths from the disease than any other country in the pandemic, and almost three times as many as the second-ranking country, Britain. There have been more than 159,000 excess deaths in Europe since since early March, during the height of the coronavirus epidemic, the head of the World Health Organization’s (WHO) regional office for the continent has said. Hans Kluge, director of WHO Europe, said that 2 million people had been confirmed to have caught the coronavirus since it was first detected on the continent four months ago. About 175,000 had died of Covid-19. The number of Covid-19 cases linked to a live export ship which docked in Western Australia doubled from six to 12. Of these seven new cases recorded in the state on Thursday, six are crew members from the Al-Kuwait ship which docked in Fremantle this week. The only other case was a returned overseas traveller who is already in hotel quarantine.