Now we know. Boris Johnson says we can be a little less careful while still being extremely careful. What that means remains unclear. Stay at home has thankfully gone, and get back to work is thankfully Johnson’s cry. But how these concessions are to be implemented is opaque. Britain is still unique in Europe in conveying a sense of being ruled by orders issued by an algorithm, rather being engaged in a project of mutual trust and common sense. Johnson holds one advantage. In what is a desperate time for any prime minister, his performance is impressive and passionate. Three-quarters of its population support Johnson and his continued lockdown, far higher than in any other country. Yet he remains hoist on his own petard. On 23 March he abandoned the Swedish strategy of mitigation and containment and switched to the government’s favoured model from Imperial College. This model suggested that between 25,000 and 500,000 people would die, depending on which policies ministers followed. Johnson, reputedly panicked into a volte face, made a broadcast that was a masterclass in political psychology. He stared into the camera and told people to stay home, not see friends or wider family nor go for more than a short walk, or “people will die”. He never mentioned the incidence of the disease, degrees of vulnerability, or high- or low-risk groups. It was one-terror-fits-all. The message was unnervingly effective. Lockdown was honoured and Johnson’s approval soared. Thousands of people have indeed died, and drastic measures were certainly justified on account of that. But Britons are now more fearful of Covid-19 than any other people on earth. And having led his country into this state of mind, Johnson must lead it out again. The prime minister must know that Britain cannot stay locked down until the entire nation is inoculated with an as yet unknown vaccine. At some point he must therefore communicate some sense of the relative risks experienced by different sections of the population and how they are to be handled. This will mean gambling on some as yet untested degree of “herd immunity” – the gamble vastly increased by Johnson’s inability to get his government to test. It would surely help if at least some of the science to which he attaches so much faith were interrogated further if it is to inform policy choices. The prime minister is fixated on two statistics, the R infection rate and the declared Covid-19 death rate. Both are controversial. The data for Johnson’s R rate relies on a national figure for infections. As Cambridge’s David Speigelhalter has pointed out, there is none. British testing is so fragmentary as to be useless. Johnson might as well rely on crude hospital admissions or excess deaths above the seasonal normal. To use infections as the single metric for which to impose unprecedented hardship on those unable to return to work, or at risk of job losses, cannot be wise. It cannot be good for the nation’s health to be making its people poorer. Equally, the Covid-linked death rate is an accumulation of deaths in and out of hospitals, of people dying “with” as well as “of” the disease. Analysis of ONS data by Fullfact suggests that Britain’s persistent high “death rate from all causes” may be linked to Covid-19 in other ways, such as the result of the NHS’s bed-clearing and operation-cancelling panic in March. In other words, the rate might be the result of a massive distortion in healthcare priorities, of sending people away to die while Covid-19 beds lie empty. It could actually be the result of policy, not its instigator. Johnson’s decisions, tied to such inexplicable data, must invite discussion. The economic agony is to continue at least two more months. Yet he makes no mention of alternative strategies, none of prolonging furloughs, none of how he means to secure wider testing – not least within the true national hotspot, the health care sector overall. What looks like being Europe’s longest shutdown has not prevented one of the worst death rates in Europe. In the long run, we’ll know whether an earlier lockdown or a full embrace of the Swedish model would have been more effective. He should at least acknowledge that others did not follow his route, and have not had to pay his price. • Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnist 