Britain hopes that lockdown restrictions will be eased soon. In a tantalising press conference last week, Boris Johnson raised expectations by declaring that the UK was now past the peak of the coronavirus outbreak. Six weeks into the shutdown of the British economy to limit the spread of the virus, the prime minister will this week set out a plan for the reopening of schools and workplaces. Such clarity will be welcome as Britain slides into the worst recession in living memory. But although Johnson expects to give a “menu of options” for lifting tough controls on social and business activity, it is clear things will be far from normal for a long time to come. After more than a month, the lockdown is starting to fray, offering a glimpse of the new abnormal. Road usage is slowly rising towards levels last seen in mid-March, before all but vital trips were banned. As spring slips towards summer, garden centres, DIY stores and some fast-food chains are reopening. Johnson has faced intense pressure to outline the government plan for ending lockdown. It is right that he does so this week. While he must be careful not to instil false hope, families and businesses need to be able to make plans. Without some clarity, social rifts and the exploitation of workers could result from increasingly varied interpretation of the rules. Britain could drive headlong into an upward curve of infections, with controls rapidly reintroduced and financial hardship for millions But as the government plots a course to a post-Covid future, it becomes clear that reopening the economy can only be a gradual process. Some sectors, such as hospitality and leisure, where large gatherings are more likely, may take several months or longer to reopen fully. Some aspects of life will never be the same again. In China there are encouraging signs for other nations as its economy reopens. Factory output and retail sales are rising. There have been no new reported cases for almost a month in the central province of Hubei, the source of the outbreak. Yet it also offers a reality check for other nations. Local authorities in Hubei have only just lowered their coronavirus emergency response, from the highest to second-highest level. Much remains to be done in the fight against the pandemic. As Johnson outlines his own roadmap for lifting the lockdown, the big risk is that Britain could drive headlong into an upward curve of infections. The rapid reintroduction of controls and greater financial hardship for millions would be the price for getting this wrong. And while some had been hoping for a rapid rebound in the economy, there are, rather, signs of lasting damage. More than 1.8 million people have signed up to claim universal credit, reflecting a rapid increase in unemployment across Britain. The grounding of international travel means thousands of jobs are being lost at airlines, and unlikely to be recovered soon. Reopening the economy will require continued government support to cushion the blow, helping to prevent long-term mass unemployment and its consequences for personal wellbeing as well as wider economic prosperity. The gradual lifting of lockdown will require Johnson to heed the calls of Britain’s biggest employers, who are demanding that the government’s job retention scheme be kept in place until at least the autumn. Failure would render the furlough programme a waiting room for redundancy. But while some dismantling of the emergency support will come, greater levels of government intervention will also be required in the long run to rebuild the economy. In outlining a return to normality, the prime minister should ensure that government support is kept in place for as long as necessary. Given the lost decade for living standards after the 2008 financial crisis, fuelled by the Conservative party’s austerity policies, he need only look in the rear-view mirror to see the dangers of choking off a recovery too soon. The outbreak of Covid-19 has made the case for investing in clean energy with an eloquence beyond the rhetorical reach of even the most ardent climate campaigners. We no longer need to wonder what a world awash with stranded fossil-fuel assets would mean for some of the biggest global energy companies, because out to sea lie tankers filled with millions of barrels of unwanted crudeare left to store the oil no one will buy out at sea. For Royal Dutch Shell, the collapse in global oil demand to 25-year lows triggered its first dividend cut since the second world war. BP will keep its dividend intact – for now, at least – but after plunging to a loss for the first quarter of this year it, too, is likely to face a grim year marked by job losses and spending cuts. Shell’s two-thirds cut to shareholder payouts was deeper than the market expected, but also inevitable. How could Shell continue paying out more than $15bn (£12bn) a year to support one of the world’s biggest dividends as major economies begin to turn their back on its products? The “supermajors” both have plans to become net-zero carbon businesses by 2050. But the actions of oil companies in the face of this crisis may represent a more adequate response to the climate emergency than a vague action plan. Shell’s decision to unshackle itself from the millstone of its dividend commitment could free up billions every year to move towards a future that is genuinely sustainable once a global economic recovery takes hold. Breaking this taboo against dividend cuts may liberate BP to follow suit. Both companies admit that there is no guarantee that global oil demand will return to the record highs of 2019, or that market prices will climb meaningfully above their 21-year lows. It’s time they both accelerate their clean energy plans to generate the momentum they will need to emerge from this crisis. Tesla surprised the market by reporting its third consecutive quarterly profit last week – not that you’d know. Elon Musk made sure the headlines on Thursday would be about anything other than electric cars by embarking on a rant about lockdown measures, describing them as fascist and undemocratic. US investors tend to tolerate eccentric business leaders if they deliver results but Musk brings an awful lot of weather with him. His charge sheet goes back way earlier than this year but on coronavirus alone his outbursts have been outrageous, from supporting controversial theories about its spread to promoting an unproven treatment. The damage done by wading into management of a global crisis is not to Tesla, given that the business was able to eke out a profit of $16m (£12.8m) in a quarter when it was hit by factory shutdowns in California and Shanghai. Musk has said and done enough in previous years for his co-investors to have long decided whether they want a controversy magnet at the helm – although they were bystanders on Friday as Musk trashed the share price by saying it was “too high”. Tesla’s shares will recover from that tirade. But the damage from Musk’s virus outbursts is external. The 48-year-old billionaire has more than 33 million Twitter followers, which means his support for questionable assertions about coronavirus – including a claim by two doctors that Covid-19 is less deadly than experts think – has greater heft than that of a crank with zero support. Even greater damage could be done by his comparing public health measures to fascist diktats, with the volatile nature of anti-lockdown sentiment underlined by a gathering of armed protestors at Michigan’s capitol last week. Tesla’s success story should be a platform for green travel and environment-friendly entrepreneurship. But under Musk, at least at this moment, it is promoting something far less responsible.