November 7th. Plant the indoor bulbs. Just as I am in the middle of them, Lady Boxe calls. I say, untruthfully, how nice to see her, and beg her to sit down while I just finish the bulbs. Lady B makes determined attempt to sit down in armchair where I have already placed two bulb-bowls and the bag of charcoal, is headed off just in time, and takes the sofa. Do I know, she asks, how very late it is for indoor bulbs? And so begins one of the funniest, smartest and most lovable books I have ever read. It’s written in the form of a diary by a narrator who gradually reveals herself to be a 35-ish married woman living in deepest Devon at the beginning of the 1930s. The horrendous Lady Boxe – first cousin of Pride and Prejudice’s bully Lady Catherine de Bourgh – is that person whom we are all having to deal with at the moment. It’s the friend who tells you accusingly through your laptop screen how easy it is to find out-of-stock supermarket items if you understand algorithms, and why the way you’ve been dosing yourself with vitamin D is all wrong. The conversation with Lady B only gets worse when she asks our heroine whether she knows that the only reliable bulbs come from Holland? The narrator replies that she does, but she feels it’s her duty to buy empire products: “Feel at the time, and still think, that this is an excellent reply. Unfortunately Vicky comes into the drawing-room and says: ‘O Mummie are those the bulbs we got at Woolworths?’” The unnamed provincial lady is living through a time of crisis at the beginning of the Great Depression, with a sense that things are harder than they’ve ever been and are probably about to get worse. She is upper-middle class, or perhaps lower-upper class, but all that means is that she is expected to Keep Up Appearances while managing on less money than the local bank manager, of whom she lives in constant, shaming dread. When money is especially tight, perhaps because the dreaded rates are due, she sidles off to a pawn shop in Plymouth with her great aunt’s diamond ring. An invitation anywhere, including to the ghastly Lady B’s, sends her into a flurry of indecision about which of her increasingly shabby dresses – the Blue, the Check, or the Tussore – she should choose, since none of them ever seems quite right. The heating in her house is always set to zero. The Diary of a Provincial Lady appeared by chance. EM Delafield was a minor novelist who bulked up her husband’s salary as a land agent by writing articles for – and perhaps this is the first clue that she was a more complex figure than her literary alter ego suggested – the feminist, socialist and progressive periodical Time and Tide. In the late 1920s, the editor told her she was after some “light middles” – vaguely comic pieces to run on the centre pages to balance all the seriousness elsewhere – and Delafield said she’d see what she could do. The result was The Diary of a Provincial Lady, which, just like Bridget Jones’s Diary, took wing from its journalistic origins to become a commercial and cultural barnstormer. While Delafield remains a minor novelist whose other books are hard to find, The Provincial Lady has never been out of print. Why is it not better known and more widely read? The title works against it – it sounds dusty and quaint. If you just flicked quickly through the pages you might be put off by the comedy servants – a belligerent cook and housemaid Ethel who are always on the point of leaving (“the servant problem” was huge between the world wars). But if you settle down to read you will find a book that is all about how to accept limitations – your own as well as other peoples’ – with as much good humour and fellow feeling as possible. Lady Boxe, we know, will never be defeated and the Provincial Lady will never be quick or brave enough to spit out her rejoinders in time. But in difficult times there is a kind of moral comfort in knowing that this very human dance will go on.