Normally, when the world shuts down, restaurants thrive. Speak to anyone who works in the hospitality industry and they’ll tell you all about slaving over a hot stove on Christmas Day or August bank holiday. But when Covid-19 entered our lives, and the lockdown commenced, one by one the burners went out in professional kitchens all over the world. Never before have restaurants been shut down en masse. After the initial shock, it’s been a hive of activity as those working in the British food establishment have come together as one. Professional chefs and home chefs have been cooking virtually side by side via social media, food writers weaving recipe threads on Twitter. Suddenly everyone has a sourdough mother and, in a bizarre bit of table turning, critics have been made redundant by restaurants. The first question on our lips was when would restaurants reopen, but that rapidly changed to how. Images of Plexiglas-partitioned tables and waiters in face masks arrived like postcards from the future from countries further ahead on their journey along the pandemic curve, showing what social distancing in restaurants would really mean. Eating out is a social activity. Sharing our food is ingrained in our psyche. Snacking with friends, feasting with family, sneaking a chip from someone else’s plate. If you can’t dine together, why bother eating out at all? Eating involves putting things in your mouth, putting lips to a glass, wiping fingers on a napkin, smelling, tasting, touching and swallowing. Eating out means doing these things in close proximity to others. All things that in a highly infectious viral epidemic are potentially hazardous to all involved and at odds with the restaurants’ duty to keep their staff and customers safe. Covid-19 affects everyone, multinational chains and one-man bands alike. The corporate restaurants with business models based on carvery queues and self-service salads now have spatial architects on speed dial. Fast-food groups are implementing click and collect. Fine dining, with more copious tables, spacious seating plans and a slower pace, may end up being the least affected. That’s assuming the customers can still afford them and aren’t fazed by the tasting menu being explained through a face mask. For mid-range restaurateurs things look bleaker. Eating out may become a choice between high-end or drive-through. Good food or great service won’t save your favourite restaurant. The new measures are dictated by layout; being able to survive with 20 seats instead of 60. Restaurants that depend on multiple sittings will have to decide how customers will feel about eating while the table next to them is being vigorously disinfected. Cafeterias, self-service and anywhere with a children’s playground will need a change of theme or insist everyone wears gloves. It will be the death knell for open kitchens that once gave a glimpse of fire and knives, but risk exposure to every splutter or cough. Those with seating outside have a fighting chance if the weather holds, but if social distancing continues through the winter, is this just putting off the inevitable? In the end it’s down to whether the customers will want to return and a financial calculation on whether now is the time to throw in the tea towel. With lockdown easing, people will be longing to eat out but may not be willing to dice with death to do so. Caution will be paramount. No more grabbing the nearest table or taking an empty glass back to the bar – breadcrumbs left on a table are tantamount now to chemical waste. Most clients will understand the limited seating, single-use cutlery and sauce from a sachet. They’ll go along with the need to reserve a table and the prepayment to deter no-shows. They may struggle a bit to accept the fact that the menu is reduced and their order now takes twice as long. And then there will be the less understanding clients. The ones who find the whole thing absurd. The ones who have always thought it was their god-given right to prop up the bar or welcome friends by squeezing a few extra chairs round a table. Others will now see a smudge on a glass as an attempt at murder. Social distancing does not fit with the doctrine that the customer is king. In the end it will be the restaurants that can pull off personalised service from a distance who will survive: the restaurants that already had regulars, knew their customers, had their trust. For once, perhaps this crisis will favour the family-owned restaurant with the patron in the kitchen and their partner out front. No employees, no corporate ties, only open to reservations. It seems ironic that a pandemic caused by contact should favour a “hand to mouth” operation. Ultimately, this isn’t something the restaurant industry can fix on its own. If there was ever an upside to the lockdown then it will be the alliances and friendships founded over these past few weeks. This coming together of professional chefs and home chefs, restaurants and critics, suppliers and buyers has to continue beyond the lifting of lockdown and until normality can be restored. Lives, livelihoods and the whole nation’s relationship with food depends on it. • Sam Wydymus is a British chef, restaurateur, and writer based in France