Talking Politics: History of IdeasIf you can feel your mind getting a little mushy by now, or if you’ve listened to enough In Our Time to last you a couple of lifetimes, why not take a listen to Cambridge politics professor David Runciman’s new series all about – you guessed it – the history of ideas. From Hobbes to Gandhi to Hannah Arendt, and touching on statecraft, revolutions and more, there’s much to dig into, whether you’re a would-be student, undergraduate, or just politically curious. Hannah J Davies Growing up with gal-dem Liv Little and Charlie Brinkhurst-Cuff take their guests including Munroe Bergdorf and Reni Eddo-Lodge back to their teenage years in this new podcast, inspired by gal-dem’s book I Will Not Be Erased. Queenie author Candice Carty-Williams is of course the perfect storyteller, talking about the pressure growing up labelled as the “strong black girl”, with older relatives offloading their worries on her. Teenage diary entries give way to insightful conversations as the guests describe how they have changed and what they would want to tell their younger selves. Hannah Verdier Chosen by Danielle Stephens (audio producer) With the news focusing on the same, life-changing topic each day, I have appreciated having narrative podcasts about moments in history to sink my teeth into. Series two of Fiasco (Luminary) ticks all of the boxes, focusing on the fascinating story of the Iran-Contra arms scandal, during the Reagan and George HW Bush presidencies. Leon Neyfakh, who created the hugely popular Slow Burn series, has a voice for telling information-heavy stories. Throughout the series, we hear from people who were involved with either making decisions, or convincing Reagan to make decisions that would ultimately lead to the biggest scandal of his time in the White House. It’s easy to get lost at points due to the large number of white men being thrown in the story tumble-dryer, but stick with it. The interviews with key figures in the crisis show the complete range of what Americans – particularly those who reach any semblance of power – consider to be patriotic. Archive material and music break up the series nicely, and despite this story going back 30 years, there are some interesting nuggets of information which bring it back to the present day. It turns out that both Reagan and Bush kept a diary – a storyteller’s dream. I wonder if the current occupant of the White House is doing the same, and what scandal such a diary would reveal? Living through lockdown alone? This week, the ever-dependable Modern Love podcast from the New York Times is all about the many faces of solo quarantine, from the people finding freedom to those mourning their liberty and human contact. Why not try: Jon Richardson and the Futurenauts | Jacob Hawley’s Job Centre | The Guardian’s Forgotten Stories of Football