The World Health Organization will establish an independent and impartial inquiry into the source and handling of the coronavirus outbreak, once the pandemic is brought under control, a virtual meeting of its annual governing body was set to agree on Monday. The proposed inquiry, mirroring previous WHO-led inquiries such as the one following the Ebola outbreak in west Africa, arguably stops short of the fully independent inquiry sought by Australia and the US, but represents a compromise brokered by the European Union and India. The WHO-led inquiry set out in a resolution being put to the UN World Health Assembly on Monday, and negotiated over the past week, is probably less independent and less directed at China’s role in informing the WHO than some critics of China wanted. But the likely terms of reference will give scope to examine China’s cooperation with the WHO. The compromise came after the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, told the assembly he supported a comprehensive evaluation, including into the sources and transmission routes of the virus. “China supports a comprehensive evaluation of the global response to the epidemic after the global epidemic is under control, to sum up experiences and remedy deficiencies,” said Xi. “This work needs a scientific and professional attitude, and needs to be led by the WHO, and the principles of objectivity and fairness need to be upheld.” He insisted that China had been transparent and open throughout, acting quickly to share information about the disease with the WHO, but said the world needed to be able to respond more quickly in future. Xi also pledged $2bn in financial support over the next two years to help deal with Covid-19, especially in developing countries. China will also make any self-developed Covid-19 vaccines a “public good” to help with the efforts to curb the pandemic, he said. Calling the pandemic “the most serious global public health emergency since the end of the second world war”, Xi said: “All along we have acted with openness and transparency and responsibility.” He repeatedly directed his remarks to Africa, highlighting how much his country was doing to help the continent develop its health systems and break the shackles of debt. The WHO director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said he would set up the independent evaluation as soon as appropriate, adding it would look into the responsibility of all actors in good faith. The greatest failing, he said, would be not to seek to learn lessons. Short-term amnesia plagued the world’s approach to global health, he said. Previous WHO inquiries into past pandemics have been hard-hitting, but have tended to shy away from criticising individual countries’ performances, preferring instead to propose structural reforms. The WHO has for years debated the degree of autonomy nation states are allowed in terms of cooperating with WHO advice or recommendations. There is, however, a clear duty to keep the WHO promptly informed of potential pandemics. The assembly also heard repeated expressions of support for the WHO’s central role in overseeing the pandemic, as well as calls to end the “hit and miss” funding of the UN body. Donald Trump has suspended all payments to the WHO pending a review into its alleged “China-centric leadership” and ineffectiveness. Speakers from nations including France and Germany also insisted that any eventual vaccine must be the product of international cooperation and treated as a public good that is available to the whole world. In a hard-hitting speech, the UN secretary general, António Guterres, said recent weeks had seen many expressions of international solidarity, but very little practical action. “We are all paying the price for implementing contradictory strategies,” he said. He warned the disease had spread across the world, and was now heading for developing countries where he predicted it would be even more devastating. He said the WHO was irreplaceable and needed enhanced support, arguing: “We are as strong as the weakest health system.” An inquiry to look back fully into how everyone reacted, he said, should wait until we have turned the page. “Now is not the time,” he insisted, arguing: “Now is the time for unity. We stand together, or we fail.” The French president, Emmanuel Macron, said the only priority worth talking about was ending the disease. The time demanded “freedom from complacency and unfounded accusations”, a remark that could be directed at Washington’s repeated claim that China may have deliberately spread the virus in the west. Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, threw her support behind the WHO, saying everyone needed to look at the sustainability of its financing.