When lockdown was announced, Maria Fernanda Guirao’s north London neighbours leapt into action. “Within a few hours, we’d set up a WhatsApp group,” says the interior designer. “Everyone pulled together to donate money to a local charity and help out with pharmacy runs or dog walking.” She watched as long-standing feuds were resolved – with the clink of wine glasses over garden fences. Ingredient swaps – sugar, flour, yeast – took place on doorsteps. The camaraderie confirmed what Maria, who has lived on this street for 15 years, has always known. Her “charmed” corner of Stoke Newington, with its Turkish grocers and independent shops, is “a great place to live”. Staying inside the terraced house she shares with her three children and husband Matthew Morgan, a writer, was no hardship either. The Argentinian-born designer, who has a background in theatre, has a knack for expressive but practical interiors. Her Victorian home is a case in point. By knocking down walls and layering colour with pattern, texture and art, she’s turned the five-bedroom house into a place to work, relax and socialise. Downstairs in the open-plan reception rooms, deep shelving houses a well-stocked bar and there’s enough space for the children to make dens. French doors open on to a garden large enough for games. With the advent of lockdown, the home office became a home school strewn with textbooks and art paraphernalia. “We haven’t got round to making soda bread or pasta like everyone else on social media. But I’ve realised that we have almost everything we need under one roof.” Her previous home was a maisonette a few doors down. “When I moved in I was newly single and feeling sorry for myself. All my neighbours prophesied that I would get pregnant. ‘Everyone gets pregnant in that flat,’ they told me.” It was a local myth which proved to be true. Within months she met Matthew. “When I was expecting our first child we decided to move to a bigger home. We’d set our sights on this house, but it was too expensive.” Then came the crash of 2008. “We were walking past when the owner appeared. We asked if he was still selling. He said yes and invited us in. We fixed a price there and then.” The previous owner had altered the house, adding the extension at the back and converting the attic. “But most of the work had been badly done so we had lots to do,” she says. “Many design crimes had been committed.” Among these was the laminate flooring downstairs. It was ripped up to reveal original floorboards that were then stripped and limewashed. Upstairs, partition walls were removed to open up the poky bathroom, where cascading house plants and bright encaustic tiles remind Maria of her childhood in rural Argentina. Some original features, such as the stained glass and the marble fireplace were intact, but most of the plasterwork had been ripped out. Luckily, she was able to rescue sections of original mouldings from a neighbour who was refurbishing their own property. She used these to recast the 19th-century cornices and ceiling roses. Before landing her first job in interiors with London designer Kate Guinness, Maria worked as a theatrical costume designer at venues such as the Barbican. She also attended London’s influential Motley Theatre Design Course, whose alumni include Olivier-award-winning Es Devlin. “I draw on my theatrical training for homes. A costume has to express its wearer, and it’s the same for interiors. There’s no right or wrong taste; it’s about finding the colours and objects which make you feel happy. It’s a form of therapy.” Working in theatre has also made her resourceful. She did most of the decorating herself, experimenting with colours – “like a teenager trying out new hair dyes” – that suit her optimistic disposition. “My clients’ homes have to be perfect, but I’m not afraid of trying out new colours here.” Although every room is different – fern green in the living room, a whisper of pink in the bedroom – the effect is the same. “I chose cheerful but calm colours. Muted or neutral tones don’t reassure me. Strong contrasts are where I feel comfortable.” The floors are strewn with colourful woollen frazada rugs from Argentina. Art by family and locals, like Rob Ryan, sit next to beachcombed shells and stones under glass domes. “Anything is a treasure in this house.” Most of the antiques – the Murano chandeliers, the 1960s resin side table – were found locally. For curtains and cushions, she used bold botanical prints by 20th-century Swedish designer Svenskt Tenn, who she’s admired since childhood when her mother gave her a fabric sample. Before lockdown, a neighbour popped over to use the kitchen as a colourful backdrop for a teaching video. The floral wallpaper (also by Svenskt Tenn) is a recent addition – “It makes us smile” – and matches the extendable antique French table that she painted blue. Maria loved the solid wood kitchen units (by deVOL) so much that she travelled to Leicester to buy them after spotting the designs in a magazine 10 years ago. They are freestanding and one day they will travel with the family to their next home. She’s not sure where that will be, but you suspect it won’t be far away. guiraodesign.com