Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: A resolution on the need to investigate the global response to the pandemic wins endorsement at the World Health Organization’s annual ministerial meeting. None of the WHO’s 194 member states raise objections to the resolution brought by the EU on behalf of more than 100 countries including Australia, China and Japan. Islam’s third holiest site will reopen next week, authorities say. The Islamic endowment overseeing the site in Jerusalem under Jordanian custodianship had taken the unprecedented step of closing it to worshippers in March as other major holy sites were shuttered across the Middle East. The UK reports 545 more deaths, taking its total to 35,341. The environment secretary, George Eustice, announces the latest figure at the government’s daily briefing on the epidemic. The UK remains the world’s second-worst affected country by deaths after the US. Afghanistan records its biggest one-day rise in infections as about half of tests done in a 24-hour period come back positive. The health ministry confirms 581 new cases out of 1,200 tests, marking the country’s worst day of the crisis – the previous high record number was 414. Five patients died overnight, taking the death toll to 178. The border between the two countries will remain closed to non-essential travel until 21 June. The closure was set to expire this week after the two governments announced a 30-day extension of the restrictions last month. The deaths of 83 people in a 24-hour period are confirmed, making Tuesday the third consecutive day on which the death toll has been below 100. However, the latest figures from the health ministry show that the majority of the latest deaths were in some of the hardest-hit areas of the country: 31 in the Madrid region, 25 in Catalonia and seven in Castilla y León. People living within a kilometre of Barcelona’s beaches will be able to return to the sand from Wednesday, as the local lockdown eases. People will be able to make “recreational use” of the Catalan capital’s beaches as long as they respect social distancing, according to the deputy mayor for safety, Albert Batlle. However, people will not be allowed to swim and must spend no longer than an hour on the beach. Half a dozen people from three English Premier League football clubs test positive for Covid-19 in the space of two days. With hopes of top-flight football resuming next month, the Premier League announces that six players or staff returned positive results in its first two days of testing. Rishi Sunak, the UK’s chancellor, says the country is facing “a severe recession the likes of which we haven’t seen”. Giving evidence to the Lords economic affairs committee, he says he expects unemployment to be in double figures by the end of the year.