John GrishamHodder & Stoughton, £20, pp304 There is something very soothing about Camino Winds, despite the fact it deals with more than one brutal murder, and a disturbing drugs conspiracy. The follow-up to Grisham’s Camino Island, it’s very different in tone to his legal thrillers – more tongue in cheek, with a lightness of touch and humour that is very welcome these days. Bruce Cable, owner of a bookstore on the idyllic Florida island and host of expansive dinner parties for the community of local writers, is enjoying a drink or two when Hurricane Leo blows in, devastating the island and leaving his friend, popular crime author Nelson Kerr, dead. Bruce and his buddies don’t believe it’s an accident – “You’re thinking somebody came over here in the middle of a category four hurricane, caught Nelson in the den, whacked him in the head, dragged his body outside, tried to clean up the blood, and than ran off. Seriously?” – but Camino island isn’t set up for a proper murder investigation; the “homicide guy” in the local police force also does bank robberies, and is pretty hopeless. So Bruce and co start investigating, and discover that whoever killed Nelson may well have wanted to prevent his next book coming out. The plot becomes increasingly outlandish, but mostly in a good way: Grisham knows exactly what he’s doing, and this is a fine way to while away an afternoon in lockdown. Hazel BarkworthHeadline, £16.99, pp320 Rachel is a secondary school English teacher, and mother of a teenager, 15-year-old Mia, in Hazel Barkworth’s debut novel, which spirals deep into Rachel’s secrets after her daughter’s best friend Lily disappears in the midst of an increasingly hot summer. Unable to get through to her own child, Rachel becomes increasingly obsessed with helping to find Lily. “She had spent over 15 years watching teenagers. She could read their glances, detect their brags and their shifts” – but the secrets she uncovers as she investigates hold up a mirror to her own life, and the choices she makes will come back to haunt her. Barkworth is excruciatingly good at encapsulating that point in life where Mia and Lily stand, on the edge of growing up – Lily’s abandoned bedroom is “heartbreaking. Its walls were the shade of purple that must have thrilled Lily six or seven years ago, and every corner was filled with the whispers of her childhood”. As her herd of social-media-obsessed teenagers get ready to go out, she skewers them with the line: “They had the means to look however they wanted, but they all chose to look the same.” Intense and claustrophobic, this is an impressive first book. Dugald Bruce-LockhartMuswell Press, £12.99, pp306 In actor Dugald Bruce-Lockhart’s first novel, Alistair, a philosophy student, is determined to transform himself after his girlfriend breaks his heart, planning to spend the summer in the Greek islands and return to university a new man. Unfortunately for Alistair, he is almost immediately mugged and loses his passport, and after also losing a job as a labourer, he is rescued from destitution only by a mysterious, wealthy artist, Heinrich, who wants Alistair to recruit tourists to pose (and possibly do more) for him. We know from the start that Alistair has ended up in jail for murder, and The Lizard follows the parties and general debauchery that led to that charge, and the wild plans for escape and revenge that follow. Alistair is nothing if not gullible, trusting women because they’re beautiful and saying pompous things like: “I was after the innate wisdom of my primeval forefathers, where the only qualification needed was an ability to hunt and fight; a stripped-back, honest existence.” But that’s all part of the fun, and this riotous chase through the glory of the Greek islands is entertaining, if somewhat preposterous. Susie SteinerBorough Press, £14.99, pp368 In the third book in Steiner’s excellent series about DI Manon Bradshaw, the 46-year-old is trying to balance life as a mother to a young child and partner to a man who might be seriously ill with her now part-time job as a detective. “Her sexual fantasies, such as they are, generally involve men performing minor DIY while retaining their emotional equilibrium.” It opens as she takes her son to the park and discovers the body of a migrant hanging from a tree, a note attached reading “The dead cannot speak”. After somehow managing to conceal the sight from her son, Manon embarks on an investigation, digging into the awful truth about life for migrant workers in Britain, not least the growing hatred of the incomers stoked by the far rightamong the locals. As taut, classy and intelligent as Steiner’s previous novels, Remain Silent is also a portrait of a very real woman, one for whom the job isn’t everything, but who isn’t entirely fulfilled by motherhood either. “Perhaps life’s satisfactions reside more in a chickpea curry and bathing the baby than uncovering torsos in chest freezers,” she says. • To order Camino Winds, Heatstroke or Remain Silent for a special price, click on the titles or go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15 