In Australia – like the rest of the world – Covid-19 has put a pause on live entertainment, overseas travel and wining and dining at restaurants. Given lockdown prevents Australians from enjoying many of the luxuries they usually spend their money on, and many face financial insecurity for the first time, it is easy to imagine our spending would slow. But this is not always the case. Commsec data shows retail spending rose by a record 8.5% in March, driven largely by an increase in spending on food and alcohol. Retail prices also rose by 1.9%, the largest rise in 31 years, excluding the introduction of the GST. We asked five Australians, in different financial circumstances, to share their bank statements and spending habits over the first two months of lockdown. With their recurring bills unaltered, their spending – or in some cases, lack thereof – on lifestyle items such as alcohol, beauty, deliveries and major splurges tells the story of how a health and economic crisis has changed habits in ways that are not always predictable. Age: 58Household income: $200,000 Sydney resident Amy is a full-time accountant (for now) who lives with her two elderly parents, her partner and her 20-year-old daughter. Her income supports the majority of the household. When I was forced to work from home, I pictured having a lot more time on my hands for home projects, so I went out and spent the money on things needed to begin in March and then more in April. The harsh reality though was it’s almost as if I have less time being at my new desk. A lot of people have jumped into the habit of drinking more during isolation. The first thing my daughter did when her bar was closed was buy ingredients for strawberry daiquiris, “to keep up her bartending skills”. I tried to put the brakes on as soon as I could. This new work-from-home life is very expensive A lot of the expenses for beauty in April are for my daughter. While she is bored at home, she spends my money on eyelashes, nail polish, shampoos and makeup. Not a lot of my time or effort is put into personal shopping or beauty products. I cut my own hair and never visit beauty salons. Habits that helped control spending went out the window in March and April. There was no real panic-buying or stocking up, it was the fact I had more access and time to shop for groceries, as well as having to spend on goods for the other members of the household as I am the designated shopper (not self-appointed). Until I instil some shopping habits to keep the cost down, this new work-from-home life is very expensive. I spent $42.45 on lottery tickets in March and $59.95 in April. It’s my personal desperation to win money to enable me to stop working. I am never an idle person, so I find that work really gets in the way of how I would love to spend my time. Winning the lottery is one (incredibly unlikely) way that could happen. Age: 24Household income: $20,000 Jess is a student who lives in Toowoomba with her mother, who owns the house. Jess was a library assistant, however she has been stood down from her job and will return when restrictions are lifted. I’ve been stressed about money for so much of my life that I swear it’s become a personality trait at this point. This period has been no different. Luckily, I’m now receiving jobseeker payments. The twisted irony of it all is that I’m actually earning more being unemployed on benefits than I was while I was working. My spending habits have been a combination of necessity and “think of your sanity”. I paid a fortune for a uni textbook in March – $210.90. I asked the bookshop if they’d rather take my kidney as payment, and they declined. In April, I secured 40 litres of fuel for just $38. I couldn’t believe it My choice to order food came not from necessity, however, but from two questions: “will you butcher this dish if you made it yourself?” and “will you eventually start crying if this craving is not satisfied?” to which the answer was “yes” on both counts. I also splurged on Animal Crossing ($79.95) in March to give myself a sense of purpose for the next few months – it worked. I began drinking more in isolation (particularly in March) partially due to boredom and the fact that everyday’s the weekend to me. I did set myself some drinking boundaries though, after polishing off half a bottle of wine before the clock struck noon. In April, I secured 40 litres of fuel for just $38. I couldn’t believe it. I drive a small Nissan, so that was a full tank for me. I haven’t even come close to running low either! Just one of a few silver linings. Age: 52Household income: was $150,000, now $50,000 Simon lives in Sydney, with his wife and 17-year-old child. He worked in marketing and advertising before Covid–19 hit, and he is now unemployed and on Centrelink payments for the first time in his life. I’ve been living on savings for now. My travel plans for the US this year have been impacted. There are some disappointing aspects as Covid-19 coincides with my son finishing school and his HSC. He understands NYC will always be there, and we’ll be flying over in 2021 (hopefully). I haven’t really changed my spending habits or lifestyle except for spending extra on home projects and gardening. I’ve been building a model car that I’ve had for two years, sitting in boxes waiting to be put together. My only other spending has been buying my son some guitar accessories to keep him sane. My alcohol consumption is identical to pre–Covid–19 I’ve always been a fan of the media and pop culture. Movies and music are a big part of my life and they’ve driven my hobbies for years. Now that I’m older, I have more disposable income and I tend to impulse-buy both toys and collections that I wanted as a child – in March and April I spent about $600 on gizmos, new speakers and vinyl. My alcohol consumption is identical to pre–Covid–19. I enjoy a bottle of wine most nights and a bit more on Friday and Saturday – so we buy three cases a week. To me, it’s all about maintaining routine. Age: 28Household income: $160,000 James lives in Canberra with his partner and works as an environmental policy officer. Both work full time and have no children or other dependents. As a full-time public servant, my employment is apparently secure. But they also said the Titanic couldn’t possibly sink. I’m a pretty good saver, but I also enjoy a healthy dose of consumerism when it comes to outdoor activities, gardening and home DIY projects. I’m currently building a home climbing wall as all the climbing gyms are closed. Funnily enough, I also built a chicken coop in the weeks leading up to Covid-19 and just beat the Canberra rush to panic-buy chickens – yes that’s right, panic-buying chickens! I also purchased some new bike gear online, mainly bags for bike-packing In terms of drinking, my partner and I decided to start the year with a sober month. We saved money, felt way better and suddenly became morning people, so we decided to stick with it and don’t see ourselves falling off the wagon anytime soon. The major splurge in March was on a new bike – $1500. This is Canberra – if your garage isn’t overflowing with bikes, your neighbours will call AFP on you. In April, I bought myself some new camera gear, and spent $1079.76 all up, with the most significant purchase being a GoPro. I also purchased some new bike gear online, mainly bags for bike-packing. I’m planning to ride to (and possibly from) Melbourne this year in November. It’s a 1000km ride through the mountains with 27km of incline climbing (equivalent to three Everests), so good quality equipment will be important. Age: 21Household income: was $200,000, now $100,000 Imogen was a full-time beauty therapist before Covid–19 hit, and she’s now technically casual staff, though she doesn’t remember the last time she worked a shift. She lives with her parents and 23-year-old sister in Sydney’s North Shore. Being temporarily unemployed has been okay for me, personally. I mostly pass the time by playing Sims and Skyrim in my bedroom. After sheepishly confronting my bank statements, it appears I definitely spent too much money in April, considering I only received $30 income. I really need to get a wriggle on with my Centrelink application. It also seems I have an addiction to ordering UberEats. I spent close to $500 in March and almost $200 in April. I’d say it’s because my cooking skills are limited. The only decent savoury dishes I can make are sunny-side-up eggs on toast and macaroni and cheese. In April, I finally decided to be wiser with which nights I’ll drink My usual splurges are on beauty products and festival tickets. In January I spent $225 on rave and festival tickets, and $140 on clothes. In April, I pulled the brakes on online shopping for clothes, although I was tempted. I still felt the need to stock up on tan and cosmetics. In terms of festivals, rumour has it there’ll likely be no large music events for two years. To say I’m deeply emotional about it is an understatement. I’m definitely guilty of raiding the shelves at Dan Murphy’s. In March, I had a newfound obsession with Vodka Cruisers and jelly shots, which pair perfectly with virtual festivals. Last weekend, my group of friends celebrated Groovin’ the Moo with me over Zoom. For a more real-life experience, I hosted a makeshift backyard festival for my household in March. In April, I finally decided to be wiser with which nights I’ll drink, hence the decrease in costs on personal shopping for Baileys and jelly-shot cups at the local bottle-o. Names have been changed.