People who use public transport may not be able to practise physical distancing effectively, the government has admitted, as it published advice for those who can’t avoid buses and trains during a staged exit from lockdown. Anyone who needs to take public transport should wear face masks, keep their distance from fellow travellers and avoid rush hour if possible, the Department for Transport (DfT) said. But the DfT conceded that “there will be times and some settings on public transport where social distancing is not possible”. The World Health Organization (WHO) guidance on face masks has remained consistent during the coronavirus pandemic. It has stuck to the line that masks are for healthcare workers – not the public. “Wearing a medical mask is one of the prevention measures that can limit the spread of certain respiratory viral diseases, including Covid-19. However, the use of a mask alone is insufficient to provide an adequate level of protection, and other measures should also be adopted,” the WHO has stated. Nevertheless, as some countries have eased lockdown conditions, they have been making it mandatory to wear face coverings outside, as a way of trying to inhibit spread of the virus. This is in the belief that the face covering will prevent people who cough and sneeze ejecting the virus any great distance. There is no robust scientific evidence – in the form of trials – that ordinary masks block the virus from infecting people who wear them. There is also concerns the public will not understand how to use a mask properly, and may get infected if they come into contact with the virus when they take it off and then touch their faces. Also underlying the WHO’s concerns is the shortage of high-quality protective masks for frontline healthcare workers. Nevertheless, masks do have a role when used by people who are already infected. It is accepted that they can block transmission to other people. Given that many people with Covid-19 do not show any symptoms for the first days after they are infected, masks clearly have a potential role to play if everyone wears them. Sarah Boseley Health editor In such situations, people are being told to face away from other travellers, avoid physical contact and cover their face when coughing or sneezing. The department published guidelines that would help people minimise the length of time when they are unable to keep two metres apart from other travellers. They include travelling at off-peak times, changing routes and stations to avoid busy areas, or walking part of the journey. “The key thing is to not be too close to other people for more than a short amount of time, as much as you can,” the guidelines said. The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, urged people to join a “cycling and walking revolution”, highlighting plans to spend £2bn on changes such as pop-up bike lanes and wider pavements. But he said that train and bus operators, as well as local authorities, have been told to increase the number of services they are running as people begin going back to work, to prevent overcrowding. Shapps has previously said that maintaining a two metre distance at all times would leave some parts of the transport network unable to cope with more than a tenth of typical passenger numbers. The government’s guidance asks people to drive, cycle or walk to work if possible but offered advice on what to do if there is no alternative to using public transport. The advice includes standard physical distancing, wearing face masks and using contactless payment where possible. Passengers should also avoid rush hour if possible, wash their hands before and after travelling and be “considerate” to fellow commuters. Public transport staff will make clear to passengers how to stay two metres apart in stations, which will be configured to ease the flow of distanced people and will also be cleaned more regularly. “Transport operators and staff have been working hard to ensure that people who need to get to work are able to do so, including crucial NHS workers and all those on the frontline of the fight against the virus,” said Shapps. “Alongside the cycling and walking revolution we are launching, and clear guidance to passengers and operators published today, we can all play our part by following the advice and reducing pressure on public transport. “If we take these steps, all those who need to use public transport should feel confident that they can do so safely, with the space to maintain social distancing as far as possible.”