We’re down to the big hitters now. No more struggling out of lampshades on the runway and no more desperately snatching your wig off during a lipsync. The queens that are left by episode 10 are always the most perfected. As perfected as an Absolut cocktail in the Interior Illusions Lounge. Those were the days! (this column does not officially endorse Absolut or Interior Illusions – other brands are available. DING!) We’ve only got Jaida Essence Hall, Heidi N-Hydrates-Van-Cartier-Dupree-St-James-Closet, Gigi Goode, Jackie Cox, Crystal Methyd and someone called Sherry Pie remaining. They’re all great in their various ways – this has been the best top six in a very long time. But which of the six tops do you want to see WIN? Widow Von’Du was eliminated last week and Heidi surprises herself by saying “and with that, we bid Miss Widow Von’Du ... adieu. Oh yes bitch, French!” Jackie Cox won the lipsync while wearing a hijab which, pleasingly, sparked actual intelligent conversation and received a largely positive response from viewers. Times have changed. It’s probably fair to say that, if this look had been seen on season two of Drag Race, a decade ago (!) the response would have been considerably frostier. (If it had been season one nobody would have been able to see it through the soft-focus filter). For this week’s maxichallenge, the girls are giving a drag makeover to female superfans of the show. Oh, so AFAB people are allowed on the show as guests but not as contestants? OK, Ru, we see how it is. AFAB stands for “Assigned Female At Birth”. In 2020, we’re AAA – All About Acryonyms. Or, if you like, that can also stand for world famous drag troupe, the AAA Girls). We’ve had a coffee. A lot of coffee. Anyway, it’s a delight seeing women on the show and getting at least a passing acknowledgement of the fact that women can do drag too. This is a great idea, and a touching tribute to the show’s instrumental and intensely loyal fanbase. The makeover episode has historically been a game-changer, because it depends entirely on who you’re paired with – if even the best contestant is paired with a makeover subject who’s a nightmare, it can send them spiralling. Superfans Bethany, Nicole, Janet, Shea, Tiffany and Grace walk in and their excitement is irresistible. This is so cute. Exactly the warmth and wholesomeness we need right now. Crystal and her partner Grace seem very well matched – both have louche indie kid energy. Hilariously, Jaida’s partner Bethany, who she chose first, has issues walking in heels. Janet The Planet (“a rollercoaster of a woman” according to Gigi Goode) and Sherry Pie have a great chat about how Janet found solace and family in the drag community. Jackie’s partner Tiffany says she started watching Drag Race from season 1, when she was 11 years old. The fact that there are now adult Drag Race fans that literally grew up with the show is ... a lot. Heidi’s partner Nicole opens up about her experiences with bullying, and it brings us to tears. We just cried at Drag Race. This lockdown needs to end NOW. Ru says to Nicole “drag doesn’t change who you are, it reveals who you are” and Nicole responds “drag brings joy”. Patent it, market it, put it on a t-shirt. $45 not inc. post & packaging. May cause dryness. RuPaul departs the workroom with a final twist – the superfans will be lipsyncing! This. Is. Genius. Jaida says to her partner “if you come out on the main stage with the mentality that your feet are gonna hurt and you’re gonna fall down – then your feet are gonna hurt and you’re gonna fall down!” Unarguable and accurate, but not particularly reassuring. In fact, that sums up Jaida in general. RuPaul is SHIMMERING in a lense flare-inducing glissade of encrusted bodice. Michelle Visage says “hi dad!” and we just spat out our coffee. Ross Matthews is here and plugging his new book so shamelessly that it’s hilarious. The special celeb judge this week is Daisy Ridley, one of the highest paid movie stars in the world currently. We’d quote her character from Star Wars but she doesn’t have any remotely memorable lines. Don’t agree? Quote one of her Star Wars lines. Go on. See! You can’t think of any. She’s a great Drag Race judge though, giving considered critique and even swearing. You can tell that Disney contract’s up. Crystal and her partner’s looks are a wild and brilliant clown/troll/Bert and Ernie mashup. Sherry Pie and her partner look EXACTLY the same, it’s spooky (the partners now have drag names too but we’re getting so confused by the five thousand names floating around that we’re just going to say “partner”). Gigi Goode and Bebe Bad (ok, that’s easy to remember) are giving ski lodge Bond girl. Jaida’s partner’s makeup is flawless. We need a gif of Daisy Ridley saying “yas ... queen ... werk.” daisy ridley as a guest judge in drag race fancam pic.twitter.com/sTQLcl8bLX Just when Ross Matthews was starting to be vaguely appealing, he makes an awful joke about beating faces. Ugh. Seeing the superfans lipsync is the purest, most joyous thing since Ash chose Pikachu in Pokemon. 10 points to all involved! Jaida wins and it’s Heidi and Jackie lipsyncing – both in disco sequin jumpsuits. And the song just HAPPENS to be disco hit, Alex Newell’s Kill The Lights. How utterly fortuitous and totally unplanned! It’s the best lipsync of the season so far. THEY BOTH STAY. Daisy Ridley is crying – showing more emotion in three seconds than she did in three instalments of Star Wars (THE SHADE). Heidi N Closet vs Jackie Cox - RuPaul's Drag Race Lip Sync pic.twitter.com/87fhG504aJ Shadiest moment The aforementioned comments about Daisy Ridley’s acting ability. This episode was all about sisterhood. Catchphrase watch “yas ... queen ... work” Animal print hunt Four items this week, with Crystal’s two leopard print interview pieces as always, and Jaida & her partner’s red sparkly giraffe print ... things. Just between us superfans Another stomper of an episode this week, giving us positive vibes and sequin-flooded oceans of love at a time when we need it most. Well done kids. 