On 20 April, Lucy left her house in a small market town in Buckinghamshire and walked through winding country lanes to a quiet field. There, her friend Owen was waiting with a joint already rolled. The weather was balmy; barely a cloud in sight. The pair smoked and caught up on school gossip, before Lucy judged that she should probably head home – any longer, and her parents might become suspicious. When she got back, she chatted to her family, before heading upstairs to her bedroom, her mother none the wiser. Lucy, who is 17, wasn’t going to let the coronavirus pandemic stop her marking 4/20, the international day of cannabis celebration. “I do feel guilty about it,” Lucy tells me, whispering (she does not want her parents to know about her weed-smoking). “I have cut back on it the last week or so.” Because she wanted to observe the lockdown rules? “Well, mostly because the weather hasn’t been great.” When social distancing measures were announced in March, thousands of students had to quickly throw their possessions into suitcases, bid goodbye to university friends, and return to their childhood bedrooms. Teenagers who’d been bracing themselves for the shock of GCSEs and A-levels were told to stand down, their exams cancelled. There will be no tearful goodbyes to friends, no rite-of-passage trips abroad, no festivals, no 18th-birthday parties. Instead, the summer months stretch out into a flat expanse of nothingness. Lucy is one of many young British adults who have been snatching moments of freedom when they can. “So much of your first year is about going out with your mates,” says Harry Batt, 20, from Fareham, Hampshire. He was in his first year of a biomedical science degree at the University of Birmingham when he had to return home to live with his sister and parents, who are both key workers. “You have that taste of freedom and then you lose it so abruptly. You feel like you’re kind of existing. My sleeping patterns are pretty rubbish. There’s not a lot to wake up for.” Socrates first complained that children “love chatter in the place of exercise” more than 2,000 years ago, and little has changed since then. The young adult brain is typically more dependent on social interaction than a fully matured adult’s. “The importance of peers has been a hallmark of adolescence for thousands of years,” says Dr Amy Orben, a research fellow at the University of Cambridge’s cognition and brain sciences unit. “What we have seen in studies is that this period involves a strengthening of social ties and a reconfiguration of social networks. Young people are finding their place in a maturing social world.” It is too soon to know what the impact of the lockdown will be on young people, because the coronavirus pandemic is so unprecedented. “It’s something we will only fully understand in future years, through more detailed study,” Orben says. Batt’s lockdown hasn’t been entirely unsociable; he’s in a tentative new romance with someone who lives locally. They connected on Instagram, and, although they haven’t met yet, they have spent hours on video calls. “The hours we’ve spent on FaceTime, it’s ridiculous,” Batt jokes. “It’s probably the equivalent of 10 dates.” Once lockdown is over, they plan to go on their first date. “He lives near the sea, so we’ll probably go for a walk on the beach and to a McDonald’s drive-through.” I’ve worked really hard to get my grades, and now I’m just going to be given them – it feels like I don’t deserve it It’s not just their social lives that teenagers are missing. Away from the feckless stereotypes of tabloid lore, some conscientious young people crave the satisfaction of passing through examinations into adult life. If exam season is a corset, afterwards there is the sweet release of slouching into a summer free of obligations. Without the build-up to A-levels, 17-year-old Amina, a student from a small town in the north, says she feels aimless. “We haven’t had a prom or a chance to say goodbye properly to friends or teachers,” she says. “We didn’t do any of the stuff people do when they leave school. That’s the most frustrating part.” She’s also fearful that being part of the “Covid generation” will impair her long-term job prospects. “I’ve been working really hard for the last two years to get my grades, and now I’m just going to be given them – it feels like I don’t deserve it. Everyone is going to think we just had our grades handed to us on a plate.” British teenagers are among the most tested in the world, and the unhappiest. “We have been concerned about stress for some time now,” says Natalie Perera of the Education Policy Institute. “Other countries test as frequently as the UK, but what is different about England in particular is that there is greater accountability. These tests come with higher stakes. Your GCSE scores matter, and so do your A-levels.” For diligent students, the sudden cancellation of exams can be disorienting. “There’s an emotional component,” Perera says. “They’ve been working for two years to get to this point. In some cases, they may feel deflated: this milestone they’ve been building towards isn’t going to happen.” Of course, for others it may be a blessed relief: teenagers are not a homogeneous bloc. Young people who haven’t had exams cancelled are also concerned. Noor Hashmi, 17, from Manchester, takes her A-levels next year. She feels that her cohort has been “overlooked”, because they’re having to teach themselves the syllabus at home, using online learning. “If I was in college I would be properly absorbing the information,” Hashmi says. “But there are only so many emails you can send to your teacher without feeling you’re being annoying.” Hashmi’s classes have all moved online, but she worries she’s not understanding the material fully. “I feel the teachers are going through the content too quickly,” she says. “It’s stressful knowing that everything we’ve covered so far won’t be revisited in depth before our exams.” Despite Hashmi’s concerns, some educationists believe coronavirus could accelerate our progression towards more online models of teaching. “The government will have to give the whole area of education technology much more focus, in case there’s a second wave,” Perera says. As big tech continues to move into the education sector, some Silicon Valley venture capitalists are staking top dollar on bricks-and-mortar universities becoming a thing of the past.  Amina, who is estranged from her family, lives alone, in supported accommodation. She is classed as a vulnerable student, so has been able to access the school building during lockdown. “It’s really eerie, seeing the school so silent,” she says. “There’s no one in the halls or the canteen to say hi to.” At home, she passes the time by packing for uni and reading course textbooks, to get ahead. She has an offer to read law at Swansea, a course she opted for after her experience of legally breaking with her family. “I know it’s early to be reading my books,” Amina admits, “but I can’t wait to get out of here and explore. I’m tired of being inside on my own all the time.” For those who had already made it to university, there is a different set of challenges. Stripped of their social networks and plunged back into a childhood holding pattern, many are struggling. “My mental health was a lot better at uni,” says Claudia, 20, from Leeds. She is in the second year of a computer science degree but is currently self-isolating with her mother and sister at home. Lately, things have been strained. Having grown used to her freedom at university, Claudia finds it hard being told what to do. “We’ll be watching TV for a bit and Mum will say, ‘Right, you need to deep clean the kitchen,’” Claudia says. “You have to tiptoe round her. I think she’s getting obsessive about cleaning because she’s not sure what else to do. It makes me feel panicky when she gets like this. I don’t know what she’s going to be like, day to day.” Claudia is not alone: University College London’s ongoing Covid-19 social study, which has been tracking the psychological and social experiences of adults in the UK during the pandemic, indicates that depression and anxiety levels have been higher in young adults than in the general population. In April, 17-year-old Manchester student Beth Palmer took her own life after telling her parents that she was struggling to cope with the lockdown restrictions. A month later, Matthew Mackell, also 17, killed himself in a park in Tunbridge Wells, Kent. Mackell, an academic high achiever, left behind a notebook in which the A-level student expressed his fears that the lockdown might affect his results. As families have been forced to spend more time together, tensions can rise: the victims’ commissioner for England and Wales has warned of a spike in domestic abuse cases, which impact children as well as adults. “Previous studies have shown that teenagers and young adults are among the most lonely people in the UK, despite being the most digitally connected,” Orben says. “The removal of contact outside the home during a lockdown can be very destructive.” In addition to her family confrontations, Claudia tells me she misses her boyfriend; she hasn’t seen him for six weeks, which, she says, feels like an eternity. “I’m probably going to be here until September,” she says. When you feel your grasp on adult life slipping, you grab freedom wherever you can. Lucy has kept her violations to a smattering of joints with friends – although there was that one time where four of them got together in a field and hung out. “In fairness, that was unplanned,” Lucy says. “It was spontaneous.” Lucy has confessed to friends that she’s been breaking the rules. “They said, ‘At least you’re being honest about it, so we’re not so angry.’” Other transgressors have come in for social censure. Someone Lucy knows recently had a birthday party in his parents’ garden. Photos appeared online, and WhatsApp groups turned into choruses of disapproval. “There was a backlash,” Lucy says. “It definitely wasn’t OK, but I also don’t think it’s OK for people to bitch about him behind his back.” It’s assumed that young people are unlikely to be seriously affected by coronavirus and are mostly in isolation to stop transmission to others – but many are in high-risk groups themselves. “I’m stuck in limbo,” says Adam Preston, a 22-year-old student at the University of Sheffield who is currently back at his family home in Eastbourne, East Sussex. Preston has a rare form of blood cancer, meaning he is at high risk from coronavirus. The government has told him that he has to isolate until 30 June. Before the pandemic hit, Preston had been accepted on to an Erasmus programme in Stockholm. “I worked so hard to get that place to study abroad,” he says, sounding morose. “And now, because of my health, it looks extremely unlikely I’m going to be able to do that.” In lieu of a year’s study in Sweden, Preston’s life is now limited to the four walls of his parents’ house, and the occasional walk outside, avoiding human interaction. He was previously on a waiting list for NHS mental health support, but his long-awaited assessment was cancelled due to the pandemic. “I feel like every avenue of progression I’ve been working towards for the last year has been frozen,” he says. Coronavirus is more than an existential fear: it has put the breaks on rebellion, or the generational search for answers What might be the long-term consequences of so many months stuck indoors for a young person who already struggles with their mental health? “A lot of people are drawing analogies with the Great Depression,” says Dr Cheryl Sisk, professor of neuroscience at Michigan State University. “We’re seeing a big disruption in people’s lives, and I think it’s going to have a major influence on the generation that is currently in adolescence and young adulthood.” Sisk explains that young people feel stress more acutely than adults: tests on lab rats find that adolescent rats struggle to turn off their stress response as quickly as adult rats do. “The general neural systems that regulate emotion and executive function are still a work in progress,” Sisk says. “That means that the brain is more susceptible to life disruptions than a fully matured brain. There is evidence from what we know about neural development that this could have a longer-lasting impact on teenagers than adults.” In addition, coronavirus will lead to the economic hangover to end all hangovers. “Every generation has its own task in its own time,” says the writer Jon Savage, author of Teenage: The Creation Of Youth 1875-1945. “When I was a teenager in the 1960s, I was terrified I would die in a nuclear war. The thought that I could die at any time changed the way I looked at the world. There are always terrible events that threaten our future, until things change and the next threat comes along.” But coronavirus feels different. For starters, young people can’t pin badges to their chests and go out to protest against the virus. They can’t do anything, really, apart from obey their parents’ house rules – few have places of their own – and wait for the world to reopen. Coronavirus is more than just an existential fear: it has also put the brakes on reaction, rebellion, or the generational search for answers. It has forced young adults to return to their families, and accelerated the destruction of existing models of work, in sectors such as high-street retail and manufacturing; this generation of young adults will have to navigate their way through a world that is radically changed. “This generation are growing up in the death throes of the post-world war two world order,” Savage says. “They are going to have to work out a new method of organisation that is sustainable and allows for a reasonable life for all.” This social reorganisation is likely to be conducted amid a protracted recession in which young people will suffer disproportionately. “What we’ve seen in previous downturns is that the graduate job market has contracted,” Perera says. She anticipates a rising number of young people going into stable professions such as teaching as a stopgap until (if) the economy gets back on track. “We always need teachers, and it’s a safe profession, although not as well paid as other graduate jobs.” Young people may also look at frontline health workers during the pandemic and consider careers in nursing and medicine; or they could see headlines about PPE shortages and be put off due to safety concerns. ‘Coronavirus might change people for the better. We want to do our part and give back’ Coronavirus could even herald the end of teenagers as a social category entirely. “The word ‘teenager’ really began as a marketing concept,” Savage explains. “America had won the war and democratic consumerism came to Europe; these were the fresh young people who could be marketed and sold to.” But teenagers aren’t as valuable as they once were to marketers. “Our society has learned to market products that were initially aimed at teenagers to people of all ages,” Savage says. With teenagers likely to suffer the most from an economic downturn, the concept of the teenager as a discrete subgroup of cash-rich consumers, dreamed up in the boardrooms of Mad Men-era advertising agencies, will effectively be over. This may not be an entirely bad thing. Once the dust settles, young people will have to reconsider their futures in a rapidly shifting world. “Things aren’t going to go back to normal,” Savage says. “The young are going to play an active part in either destroying or creating a new world. That’s kind of extraordinary.” He predicts greater youth-led social activism, particularly around the climate emergency and animal rights. Hashmi tells me she feels tentatively hopeful for the future. “I think coronavirus might change people for the better,” she says. “Some of my friends, who weren’t considering working in hospitals and stuff, now look at clap-for-carers and think, we want to do our part and give back.” She believes coronavirus will create a more compassionate, selfless generation of young people. “I think we’re more aware of others now,” Hashmi goes on. “At the start of this, I was just thinking about making myself safe. But seeing the death toll increase, I was thinking about everyone else.” Despite the fact that the lockdown restrictions have been eased, with socially distanced meet-ups for one individual from each household now permitted, Hashmi is in no rush to start socialising. “Most of my friends and I think that it would be safer and better to meet when the lockdown is way, way more relaxed and the death toll has decreased,” she says. “It doesn’t feel safe to go out right now.” Most of the young adults I spoke to accepted the lockdown in a spirit of sacrifice, with equanimity and good grace. Very few had considered breaking the rules. “We want to stay in,” Batt explains. “We know it’s for the best.” And when the lockdown is finally over, they will step out into a world that is radically uncertain, full of promise but also doubt. Will the kids be all right? “I’d like to think the kids will always be all right,” Savage concludes. “I have great faith in young people and their ability to see what is wrong with the world and come up with solutions. I am always optimistic.” • Some names have been changed. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at befrienders.org.