Times are truly strange when a man dressed in a grim reaper’s costume in 90F (32C) heat is the most sane person around. But last week, as people flocked to Florida’s recently reopened beaches, Daniel Uhlfelder had a message for beachgoers. “The grim reaper represents death. This is a deadly virus. It’s a global pandemic,” he said in a televised news broadcast. It’s not in Uhlfelder’s nature to want to keep beaches closed – as a lawyer, he has campaigned to keep beaches publicly accessible in the past. But as the coronavirus death toll reaches 75,000 in the US and global shutdowns help to slow the spread of the deadly virus, Uhlfelder felt he had to say something. “I’m worried about the pandemic getting out of control and killing a lot of people … I couldn’t sleep at night [if I just did nothing],” he says. holy shit pic.twitter.com/rVw24plXTp And so, he came up with an idea to dress up with a cloak and scythe, and take a Grim Reaper tour of Florida’s beaches. The protest has garnered national attention: Uhlfelder has appeared on Saturday Night Live, the Daily Show and CNN, and has raised thousands of dollars, which he will donate to Democrats who run for Congress. But when he came up with the idea, his wife warned him not to do it. He was even told by people online not to partake in the stunt – some laughed and wished heatstroke upon him. In the end, their unkind words turned out to be pretty useful. “I thought, maybe they have a point,” he says. And so, Uhlfelder took heed of his enemies’ advice and swapped out the $20 Walmart costume he originally intended to wear and called a friend to see if she might have something better. “She was like, ‘I’ve got an idea – let’s make [the costume] out of linen.’ I had a bathing suit on underneath and flip-flops, so I felt great,” he says. Needless to say, the experience was not entirely pleasant. Uhlfelder says he was heckled on the beach: people took photos of him, called him a jerk and some other, more unpleasant names too. Still, Uhlfelder says the comments don’t bother him – in fact, he’s not even particularly mad at the beachgoers. Uhlfelder empathizes with people who want the economy to reopen and life to go back to normal – particularly when the president doesn’t take shutdown seriously. “We have beautiful beaches, I’d love to go to the beach – that’s why people come to Florida. We don’t have anything else,” he jokes. But he asks why the US has made the offer of staying at home so unappealing for ordinary Americans. “We are the wealthiest country on the planet. Why can’t we have people taken care of for two, three, four months, instead of being put in these situations? They are perfectly comfortable starving out or killing people,” he says. Most people have reacted positively to the stunt – and Uhlfelder says he is happy that his dry sense of humor has cut through in landscape when some of the loudest voices have been anti-shutdown protesters carrying guns. He just hopes his protest empowers others to do the same. “If people don’t agree with what the government is doing, and [are able], you have to do something about it. People died for that right,” he says. “Someone has to stand up to these people – that’s what I’m doing. I want others to do it too. It gets tiring being the only one.”