Graced with one of the finest and most mercurial voices in jazz, Ella Fitzgerald was a titan of song during the five decades of her career. This illuminating doc traces Fitzgerald’s life from appearing at 16 in a talent contest at the Harlem Apollo while she was homeless to facing horrific racism as a singer in the 1940s before becoming one of the leading voices in the civil rights movement. Archive clips provide an insight into Fitzgerald’s huge talent. Ammar Kalia Engineering wonders with a side order of ostentatious wealth in this new series tracking the comings and goings at one of the world’s busiest travel hubs. This episode focuses on the A-380 planes: monsters of aviation that are looked after by more than 2,000 specialists. Phil Harrison TV’s Chatty Man returns with a reimagining of some of Britain’s most beloved gameshows, from Bruce Forsyth’s The Price Is Right to Bullseye. Tonight, he is joined by a host of celebrity couples to try their hand at a round of Play Your Cards Right. A lighthearted, nostalgic trip. AK A tender portrait of a mother and daughter’s relationship set to the buzzing backdrop of beekeeping. Hatidze supports her ailing mother in the mountains of Macedonia and spends her time cultivating bees, until a family moves in next door and disrupts her quiet way of life. AK When Holby’s emergency department is taken hostage, Charlie builds an unexpected connection with the gunman. Meanwhile, Dylan is frustrated by a misunderstanding with Faith but, as the situation escalates, he has the opportunity to reveal his true feelings with one heroic gesture. Ellen E Jones Amid a deluge of recent docs about the Queen and her reign, here is a film that focuses on her cheerfully rebellious little sister. Margaret was the much-papped princess who seemed to relish the chance to slip the regal yoke of duty and really live it up in the 60s and 70s. Graeme Virtue Internal Affairs, 11pm, BBC One British director Mike Figgis does a thorough American job in this powerful tale of police corruption. Richard Gere is dark and dangerous as a cop with suspiciously expensive tastes and under investigation by internal affairs. It’s basically a contest with investigator Andy García that opens raw wounds. Paul Howlett