Mar de Frades Albariño, Rías Baixas, Spain 2019 (£18.95, greatwesternwine.com) As I write this, the following list feels like a description of unimaginable luxury: a crisply sunny day by the sea, a platter of seafood – fat prawns, sweet and tender crab, plumply sensual oysters – freshly caught and bought direct from the fisherman; a freezer bag with a perfectly chilled bottle of the great Spanish seafood white wine, albariño. The last is the easiest to recreate at home. You can do it reasonably cheaply, with a bottle of Sainsbury’s Taste the Difference Albariño 2018 (£7.50), an ever-reliable version of the variety’s mix of subtle apricot and apple skin fruitiness and citrus and sea-salt freshness. Or you can push the proverbial boat out for some of Spain’s smartest dry whites, such as the latest release from Mar de Frades, where the fruit is crystalline, the texture silky, and that seasidey briney quality, so evocative of its origins in Rías Baixas in Atlantic coastal Galicia, is in full invigorating effect. Lagar de Cervera Pazo de Seoane O Rosal, Rías Baixas, Spain 2018 (£13, armitwines.co.uk) Albariño has been in Galicia for the best part of a millennium. And one of the finest exponents, Palacio de Fefiñanes has been making fine dry whites (such as the typically gorgeous floral, herbal, juicy pear and subtle apricot-scented Palacio de Fefiñanes Albariño 2019; £15.99, Waitrose) for the best part of a century. But the region’s rise to prominence as one of the world’s most celebrated white wine regions has been relatively recent, getting its designated regional “D.O.” status in the 1980s. Many of the best wines in Rías Baixas – the pristine Pazo de Señorans Albariño 2018 (£15.99, virginwines.co.uk) for example – are pure albariño. Others, however mix albariño with other, equally intriguing local varieties such as the caiño, loureiro and treixadura combined with roughly 60% albariõ by Lagar de Cervera, a Galician offshoot of the great, historic Rioja producer La Rioja Alta, for their captivatingly meadow-and-orchard-scented white. Laurent Miquel Albariño, IGP Pays d’Oc, France 2018 (£11.49, Waitrose) There is great albariño – or rather alvarinho – just across the border from Galicia in the Vinho Verde region of northern Portugal, from producers such as Anselmo Mendes (Muros Antiguos 2019; £14.26, winebuyers.com) and Quinta de Soalheiro (Alvarinho Reserva 2017; £25.21, winebuyers.com). Vineyards planted by producers from far beyond the variety’s original home, and who were inspired to make their own albariño after tasting it as it became increasingly popular in the 2000s and 2010s, are now bearing increasingly interesting fruit. A number of the most promising are made in New Zealand, such as the punchy, fruity Villa Maria Cellar Selection Albariño 2018; (£12.99, nzhouseofwine.co.uk) and (from the same parent company) the lipsmackingly peachy Leftfield Albariño 2019 (£10.79, Waitrose). It’s gaining ground in the Pays d’Oc, southern France’s experimental varietal hotbed, with the most convincing version I’ve tasted so far being Laurent Miquel’s cool but succulent example. Follow David on Twitter @Daveydaibach