At least you can rely on the magnificent fells to always be there. And perhaps also the man-mountain striding purposefully through them? The third series of The A Word opened with a shaggy dog story, told by the grandad and volunteer firefighter Maurice (Christopher Eccleston), which confirmed him to be as gloriously obtuse as ever. Everything else in the lives of the Hughes Scotts seems to be in flux. Two years on from the events of the last series, Paul (Lee Ingleby) and Alison (Morven Christie) are living 100 miles apart – her in Manchester, him still in their Lake District town – and sharing the care of their now-10-year-old autistic son, Joe. Their daughter Rebecca (Molly Wright) is staying with Maurice on a visit home from uni, and Alison’s brother Eddie (Greg McHugh) has also moved in. It is clear, though, just how far this fractured family have come since Joe’s initial diagnosis. His parents now have the communication tools and strategies in place to tackle problems as they arise. There’s a poetry to their care handover ritual, for instance, which neurotypical people may also find soothing. “It’s time for me to go there, and you to stay here,” says mum or dad. Joe replies: “There, here; here, there,” and is then offered the choice of a goodbye hug or handshake. He usually goes for the handshake. They are doing really well, but that doesn’t mean it is not still hard. The A Word always did hit us directly in the feels and its theme of anxious parents struggling to reassure anxious kids is doubly resonant for audiences under lockdown. Even Joe’s soundtrack-providing habit of blocking out the world with indie disco favourites is no longer a failsafe, and when he throws his beloved headphones into a lake, Paul blames Maurice’s disruptive influence. So while “autism” is no longer a banned expletive, perhaps “the D-word” has replaced it? “‘Divorce”, ‘single parent’ – they feel like words you’d use for somebody else, don’t they?” says a sympathetic Eddie. Or maybe what really bothers Paul is his suspicion that Alison is having an easier time of it in Manchester. In fact, she is also facing up to her parental failings. Maurice remains the unrivalled master of saying the wrong thing at the worst possible time, but Alison can also stumble over her words when discussing Joe – even as she snaps at strangers in car parks, for similar blunders. “I’ve spent the last 10 years fighting my son’s corner,” she told her father. “Maybe it got to be a habit and now I’m just always looking for a fight? I don’t want to be like that!” Maurice – ever caring, never tactful – is also the confidant of choice when Louise (Pooky Quesnel) wants to find out what Ralph (Leon Harrop), her adult son who has Down’s syndrome, is up to. “We need a disco,” is Ralph’s eccentric way of breaking the news of his wedding. (If they haven’t booked a DJ yet, I know of a muso 10-year-old with his own brand-new headphones who may be cheap.) Indeed, Maurice’s very centrality to the show is starting to feel like an ominous hint that he won’t survive the series; drama writers are just contrary like that. His incredulous reaction when Dr Graves advised him to go easy on the local superhero shtick also doesn’t bode well: “I’m not 60 in the way other men are! I’m not a normal man!” In the unhappy event that the irreplaceable Maurice does need replacing, the show has some promising additions. Alison’s car park run-in could have been merely an illustration of her prickly temper, but actor David Gyasi is far too handsome to play bit parts; he may as well have had “New Love Interest” written on the side of his van. We’ll also probably be seeing more of Joe’s teacher, since she is played by Julie Hesmondhalgh, and you don’t hire an actor of that calibre just to do a bit of small talk at the school gates. Back in series one, a specialist listed “finds change difficult” among the set of behaviours that place Joe somewhere on the autistic spectrum, and The A Word has since demonstrated that, actually, to varying degrees, we all do. So if it is a healthy model for accepting life’s only constant that you’re after, you could do much worse than to tune in. As the series begins, it’s holding on tight to what endures and gracefully letting go what doesn’t.