The Guardian setter Qaos, who tends to give us a theme, had a recent puzzle which appeared to lack one. Except … this was Qaos’s 100th puzzle for the paper and close examination of the across entries revealed that they could all have the Roman numeral for 100 inserted somewhere to form another word, as suggested by a message hidden in the first letters of the clues. It’s the perfect opportunity for a catch-up. How time flies! My biggest change has been making the puzzles easier to solve. My remit has always been fun, accessible puzzles – but making them easier is trickier than it might seem. I find I’m much quicker when writing convoluted, hard clues. Rufus was a master of accessible puzzles while keeping his clues as elegant as possible. I’ve also tried to use more “odd-odd” grids (with a one across and a one down) that give more checked starting letters. It makes grid fills more difficult (especially with a dozen or so themed entries) but these days we have software to help. When I started at the Guardian my daughter was very young; now that she’s a teenager, she likes to help suggest ghost themes (cars, cats and the Mr Men to name a few). My work in IT has changed enormously in that time, with so much computing moving into the cloud and data volumes growing exponentially. The biggest change for me has been health, as I was diagnosed with MS shortly before my first Guardian puzzle. It’s a bit like living with a time bomb, not knowing what the next relapse will affect. It might be loss of vision, movement or cognitive ability. You might think that would be a negative, but it has actually had the opposite effect on me. I appreciate every single day, including every new crossword I can write. It’s another reason why reaching 100 Guardian puzzles has been a milestone. I’ve become better at ditching puzzles that don’t work and avoiding a situation where crowbarring in extra themed words leads to more obscure entries. I try my hardest to ensure that fun comes first. One puzzle I probably should have rethought was the “elements” one. I was cursing myself after cluing -IUM for the umpteenth time. I think so, especially with software like Crossword Compiler. This has made filling grids much easier and allows more time for extras, hence the rise in themes, ninas and so on. It also makes you appreciate how skilled setters were before such tools. If I had to use pen, paper and Scrabble tiles, every puzzle would take an eternity. After I sent in No 99, I thought I should do something a bit different for 100 – you know me and numbers! Given that I’m always abusing Roman numerals in my numerical clues, using C felt fitting. Filling the grid with missing-C words was actually pretty simple after writing a program. The acrostic was more difficult, especially trying to avoid ruining the surface readings of the clues. It makes one appreciate just how good setters like Araucaria were for writing clues in rhyming couplets – all without the aid of computers. Likewise. I’m very lucky in that my IT work continues relatively untroubled, with remote access to the systems I use. I feel very sorry for people who have lost their jobs or are struggling. Do wish the Guardian solvers well from me too – the comments section must be an oasis of calm for some in these troubled times. Yes, it’s not a bad place, the comments section. Here’s to the next 100.