This selection of Snow White tales from around the world ends on an unfamiliar note. In the Moroccan story “The Jealous Mother”, beautiful Lalla does everything you might expect of a self-respecting heroine. After running away from a rivalrous older woman, she takes refuge as housekeeper to seven ghouls, gets tricked into ingesting a ring that propels her into a coma, before awakening from apparent death many months later. The seven ghouls are thrilled when Lalla turns out to be safe but, unlike the seven dwarfs, they have no intention of handing over their domestic drudge to a handsome prince anytime soon. “Now,” they say, “never answer the door for anyone! Never go out! We cannot afford losing you again!” And so they all live happily ever after. It is sly of folklorist Maria Tatar to end her book with a tale in which Snow White is instructed to stay home and do the washing up rather than follow her own desire. Sly because it goes so spectacularly against the direction of traffic over the past four decades during which feminist scholars and writers have strenuously read against the patriarchal grain of our most familiar folktales. Starting with Angela Carter’s short story collection The Bloody Chamber and continuing through to Disney’s 2013 blockbuster Frozen, the modern princess is expected to be a bit of a badass. She rules, she fights but, most importantly, she tells the boys what to do. Tatar, who is a professor of folklore and mythology at Harvard, knows all this, but her interest in fairytales goes far beyond the formulaic “girl power” reworkings of recent years. Instead what she does is seek out versions of Snow White that have been circulating around the world for centuries, ones that replace kings with sultans, apples with pomegranates, and pale maidens with brown-skinned girls. What also gets dislodged is the idea that there is a fixed or single way in which the Snow White story “ought” to run. This doesn’t mean anything goes. All the tales collected share a recognisable architecture of sexual rivalry, deep sleep and spectacular regeneration. In Greece Maroula is despised by Venus and rescued from a coma by her brothers; Armenian Nourie Hadig has to dodge murder at the hands of her rivalrous mother who is outraged to be told by the moon that she is no longer “the fairest of them all”. In the Southern states of America King Peacock discovers a girl floating downriver in a golden coffin and revives her by removing a seed from her mouth; while in the Highlands of Scotland Queen Silver-tree instructs her husband to kill their beautiful daughter and serve up her heart and liver for dinner. In several versions, the wicked older woman is punished by having red hot shoes soldered to her feet, forcing her to dance to her death (hints here of a scorched Cinderella). Tatar’s avowed intention is to demonstrate the endless fluidity of folktale narratives, the way they wash into one another so that it becomes hard to know exactly where one ends and another begins. Indeed, many of the variants collected here pick and choose from a range of stories including Goldilocks and Sleeping Beauty to bolster their dramatic impact. Now and then a canonical version of a single tale may emerge, but that is only by chance, because it happens to snag on a particular cultural moment and get written up as if it somehow mattered more than all the others. This is what happened in 1812 when the Grimm Brothers, writing under the romantic spell of an emerging German nationalism, published their version of “Snow White”. Far from being an “authentic” peasant tale “collected” from the forests of Westphalia, the Grimms’ “Snow White” is actually a literary construct, carefully stitched together from a whole host of other well-travelled versions. The Grimms tightened the plot, dismissed surplus characters, adopted a curiously flat, affectless tone and made the result sound as if it were the spontaneous expression of an ancient German Volk. Ironically, this is the version that Walt Disney chose to drive further into popular culture when he made his classic animation film of 1937, designed to rouse America from its Depression-era slump – all that whistling while you work, not to mention a wicked stepmother who appears to be modelled on Joan Crawford. Hitler loved it. The Snow White tales that Tatar presents here are not as slick as the confections of the Grimms and Disney. Instead, many of them seem to wander along their own sweet way. But what this process of defamiliarisation does is alert us to our own myopia in reading hierarchically, as if the white northern European Protestant Snow White is the authentic one, and all the others somehow spoiled or fake. What Tatar urges in her deft and thoughtful introduction is that we read each variation, whether it is from West Africa, Afghanistan or China, with equal attention. For once Snow White, “the fairest of them all”, migrates into cultures with a history of slavery and race discrimination, a whole new of possible meanings emerges. This provides a way of thinking about how fairytales reveal more than the essentially early 20th-century upper bourgeois insights of Freudian psychoanalysts. There are plenty of examples of mother-daughter rivalries in these tales to be sure, but there is so much more of the material and temporal world – food, hunger, disease and war – too. • The Fairest of Them All: Snow White and 21 Tales of Mothers and Daughters is published by Harvard University Press (RRP £22.95). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.