Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: Global coronavirus cases stand at 3,937,813, according to the Johns Hopkins tracker, with global deaths at 276,863. The US has the most fatalities, at 77,179, followed by the UK (31,316) and Italy (30,201). On Friday, Russia recorded 10,000 new cases for the sixth day in a row. The head of the International Monetary Fund has suggested global economic forecasts could be revised down, and warned the United States and China against rekindling a trade war that could weaken a recovery. Kristalina Georgieva, the IMF’s managing director, said recent economic data for many countries was coming in below the fund’s already pessimistic forecast for a 3% contraction in 2020. On the same day, the US accused China and Russia of cooperating to spread false narratives about the coronavirus, and tightened visa guidelines for Chinese journalists. Travellers to the UK will be quarantined for two weeks when they arrive as part of measures to prevent a second peak of the coronavirus pandemic, Boris Johnson is expected to say on Sunday when he lays out his roadmap out of the lockdown. He will announce the introduction of quarantine measures for people who arrive at airports, ports and Eurostar train stations, including for Britons returning from abroad. Donald Trump has said the coronavirus is “going to go away without a vaccine”, but warned there could be “flare ups” next year. Speaking to Republican lawmakers, he also said the US death toll could top 95,000. His vice president Mike Pence’s press secretary, who is married to one of Donald Trump’s senior advisers, has tested positive for coronavirus. She is the second White House staffer to test positive this week. The leaders of US congressional foreign affairs committees have written to more than 50 countries asking them to support Taiwan’s inclusion in the World Health Organization. Taiwan, which is not a member of the United Nations, has been excluded from the WHO, which is a UN agency, due to objections from China. The letter was sent to “like-minded” countries, large and small, seen as friends and allies of Taiwan, including Canada, Thailand, Japan, Germany, Britain, Saudi Arabia and Australia. Mexican president Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador said on Friday that he aims to present plans next week to reopen the economy, as key sectors like car-making look to begin business again after over a month of quarantine measures. Industry sources say 18 May is seen as the tentative date for reopening the automotive sector in Mexico, provided it gets a green light from president Lopez Obrador. Argentina confirmed it will extend a quarantine covering its capital Buenos Aires but relax restrictions in the rest of the country. The national quarantine South America’s second largest economy began on 20 March and will be extended in the capital until 24 May. Until Friday, the country had registered 5,611 confirmed cases of the virus and 293 deaths. The British medical journal The Lancett says the biggest threat to Brazil’s ability to successfully combat the spread of the coronavirus and tackle the unfolding public health crisis is the country’s president, Jair Bolsonaro. Its editorial said his disregard for and flouting of lockdown measures was sowing confusion across Brazil, which reported a record number of Covid-19 deaths on Friday. Roy Horn, of the Las Vegas double act Siegfried and Roy, has died after contracting Covid-19. He died in Las Vegas on Friday, aged 75. The duo’s performances - in which the illusionists would ride on elephants, cavort with tigers and make animals disappear - became one of Las Vegas’s biggest attractions. Horn was critically injured in 2003 when a tiger attacked him on stage.