In 1939, Jules Konopinski escaped the Nazis “by the skin of my teeth” when he fled to the UK as a nine-year-old boy. Eight years later, he found himself fighting fascism with his fists and boots on the streets of London, despite a world war that had supposedly defeated the scourge of nazism for ever. Konopinski, now 90, joined the 43 Group, a guerrilla army of British-Jewish ex-servicemen and others that waged physical battle against the far right in the aftermath of the war. “The enemy hadn’t gone away,” he told the Observer. It took four years to see off the postwar fascists. The group disbanded 70 years ago next month, and now there are only five members still alive: Konopinski, Harry Kaufman, Jerry Kaffin, Gerry Abrahams and Martin White. A sixth, Maurice Podro, died earlier this month. Among the group, which quickly swelled after its formation from 43 to more than 1,000, was Vidal Sassoon, who joined as a teenager before finding fame as a hair stylist to the stars. The original founders “did not intend to allow the fascists ever again to rule the streets of London”, wrote Sassoon years later. “And so it began. We had turned the other cheek for the last time and, as a 17-year-old recruit, I was proud to be involved.” The 43 Group was formed in April 1946 at Maccabi House, a Jewish sports club in Hampstead, north London, a couple of months after four Jewish ex-servicemen had encountered a far-right rally at which “aliens in our midst” were denounced. The 43 pledged to stop fascism by physical means if necessary. They were soon engaging in confrontations on the streets. “They were violent and radical,” said Daniel Sonabend, the author of We Fight Fascists: The 43 Group and their Forgotten Battle for Post-war Britain, published last year. The enemy hadn't gone away “This was happening in the shadow of the second world war and the Holocaust. Some of these Jewish men and women had escaped nazism, some had seen the concentration camps, some had been prisoners of war, plenty had lost family. “They had seen how fundamentally violent fascism is when it is allowed to take the reins of power. These people will kill us, put us in the gas chambers. Therefore, they said, we have to stand up for ourselves.” Among the group’s targets were Sunday-evening rallies in Ridley Road market, in east London, where hundreds of people gathered to hear Oswald Mosley, who was keen to revive his prewar British Union of Fascists, and his supporters. Morris Beckman, one of the 43 Group’s founders, who died in 2015, recalled in his memoir: “A young fascist about 18 years of age appeared in front of me and called me a ‘fucking Jew bastard’, catching my left thigh with a nearly well-aimed kick. I hit his nose square on and it spurted blood … I kicked his backside as hard as I could and he staggered off. A hard blow landed smack on my right ear and completely unbalanced me. “For a moment, I was dazed, disorientated. My assailant was about to close and finish me off when Sam grabbed him around the neck and pulled him to the ground. Then Sam jumped on him. The genial, good-humoured Sam said, ‘I’m just breaking the bastard’s ribs so he won’t attend any more meetings.’” Konopinski joined the group at the age of 17. By that time, he had lost nine uncles and aunts in the death camps. “Then we saw the revival of something we thought we’d killed off in the war,” he said. He became one of the group’s “commandos”, available round the clock to disrupt rallies and confront fascists. “There was a lot of violence, but it was justified. I enjoy debating and discussing, but when you’re dealing with thugs, the rabble on the street, you can’t talk to them. We were defending our communities. It was a necessary defence.” Not everyone was in favour of the 43 Group’s approach. “The Board of Deputies [of British Jews] was keen to keep them in check,” said Sonabend. “They tried to close it down. The establishment did not want anything that could bring Jews into disrepute or encourage more antisemitism. They saw any form of lawbreaking and violence as deeply problematic. “The response of 43 Group – which had raised a lot of money and plenty of prominent Jewish supporters – was to say the board was more worried about the reputation than the safety of the Jewish community.” The resurgence of fascism in the aftermath of the war has had little attention from historians. “It goes against the narrative we have in this country of postwar Britain – that we were the victors against the Nazis. Having to confront a notion that there were fascists who were tolerated by the government, protected by the police and, at some points, gained a hearing among their audiences on the streets is a bit jarring,” said Sonabend. “In August 1947, there were antisemitic riots in Manchester, Liverpool and other cities, which have been largely forgotten. They are alien to the story we tell about ourselves.” According to Konopinski, “We Jews, all our lives, have been taught that if anyone spits at you, you walk away – that’s the teaching of the rabbis. But there comes a time when you have to make a stand – and we made a stand. I’m very proud of what we did.”