Barber Shop ChroniclesA never-before-broadcast recording of Inua Ellams’s 2017 hit play splicing stories and banter with barbs and laughter. Available to stream for seven days from 7pm Thursday on the National Theatre’s YouTube channel. Clare Brennan Night of the Living Dead ™ – RemixGhoul in graveyard, blonde on sofa, little girl gnawing the bone of a dead relative. Shot by shot, innovative company Imitating the Dog and Leeds Playhouse replicate and dismantle the action of George Romero’s 1968 zombie movie, which plays in the background. A feat of ingenuity and a conjuring of America’s unconscious, which reminds us not to believe our eyes. On a pay-what-you-like basis until 17 July at imitatingthedog.co.uk Susannah Clapp AlmaThe green-haired Finnish pop powerhouse levels up on her forthcoming debut full-length project, Have U Seen Her?, recorded in the LA sunshine but packing plenty of Scandinavian pop chiaroscuro. Out on Friday. Kitty Empire Art of Now: Berlin’s NightlifeBerlin’s club scene is the envy of the world. Produced before Covid-19, this Radio 4 documentary asks how a €1.5bn sector can adapt to rising rents. Is government support, such as that for opera houses, an option for sweaty techno dungeons? BBC Radio 4, Thursday, 11.30am. KE New York City BalletNew York City Ballet is running a brilliant season of work, announced every Monday, with ballets by founder choreographers George Balanchine and Jerome Robbins for three days from Tuesday, then new work on Friday for a further three days. Pieces by Pam Tanowitz and Kyle Abraham are to come, but this week’s offering (until the end of today) is Alexei Ratmansky’s masterful 2008 piece to Shostakovich’s Piano Concert No 2, full of fun and invention. From Tuesday to Friday, a mixed programme includes extracts from Balanchine’s The Four Seasons and The Four Temperaments, and Robbins’s Afternoon of a Faun; Friday 15 May brings Justin Peck’s Pulcinella Variations to Stravinsky. Sarah Crompton AnthropoceneIn their 2019 operatic thriller Anthropocene, commissioned by Scottish Opera, composer Stuart MacRae and writer Louise Welsh explore climate change and the issues it raises for humanity. A top cast includes Jennifer France and Benedict Nelson. Available on operavision.eu until Thursday. Fiona Maddocks The World’s Most Photographed: Queen VictoriaRiveting examination of the way the camera transformed the relationship between the monarchy and the British people during Victoria’s 64-year reign, from the young bride to the deeply grieving widow, in daguerreotypes and even early Kodak shots. On BBC Two, Wednesday, 10pm. Laura Cumming Frieze New YorkVisit the art fair’s viewing rooms online at your leisure, with swathes of international work, old and new, from artists as diverse as William Kentridge, Rodney Graham and Yinka Shonibare, Marlene Dumas, Cindy Sherman and Alex Katz. Until Friday at frieze.com LC Mo Gilligan’s All Star Happy HourMuch-loved standup Mo Gilligan hosts this new four-part lockdown show live from his own home. The hour-long show is brimming with celebrity guests, musical performances, sketches and games for members of the public to play. Mondays, Channel 4, 10pm. Kadish Morris 