1) The Bundesliga returns behind closed doors this weekend and the standout fixture is the Revierderby. Why is Dortmund v Schalke such a big deal? This short history lesson should help explain the rivalry. Here are 10 of the best goals and moments as seen through blue-tinted spectacles, including a last-gasp equaliser from Jens Lehmann in 1997. Yes, Jens Lehmann. To redress the balance, here are Dortmund’s pick of their 10 best goals against Schalke and a 4-1 win back in 1987. A year later it was Schalke celebrating a three-goal win, with manager Diethelm Ferner giving it plenty. There will be no fans in attendance this weekend: here’s a flavour of the colour, noise and passion usually on show when the fierce rivals meet. 2) Still keeping up with the K-League? You should be. Sunday’s game between Gangwon and FC Seoul was settled by this backheeled beauty: 3) Has Netflix’s The Last Dance left you hungry for NBA 90s nostalgia? Let’s start with the Chicago Bulls, who clinched their first-ever title in Game 5 against the Lakers back in 1991. They secured the three-peat in 1993, Michael Jordan’s fourth-quarter surge sealing a one-point win over Phoenix in Game 6. The following year saw the decade’s only Game 7 as the Rockets edged out the Knicks. The Bulls were soon back on top, outclassing Seattle in 1996 and Utah in 1997. The 90s ended with a new champion, the San Antonio Spurs, who began a new era of Western Conference dominance. 4) On this day! Three years ago: Spurs play their final game at White Hart Lane – a 2-1 win over Manchester United – before eyes mist over at a show-stopping farewell ceremony. Thirty-two years ago: Vinnie Jones introduces himself to Steve McMahon (no booking), and the Crazy Gang beat the Culture Club. Forty years ago: Valencia hold their nerve to beat Arsenal and win the Cup Winners’ Cup – the first European final to be decided on penalties. 5) And on this day a full 89 years ago, France beat England 5-2 in Paris. It was their first win for France in a rivalry that would go on to give us [deep breath] a literal leg-breaker from Nobby Stiles en route to World Cup glory, Bryan Robson scoring after 27 seconds, a rosy-cheeked Alan Shearer getting his first goal for England and Stuart Pearce having a brush with Basile Boli. There was high drama at Euro 2004 in a game with a missed penalty from Becks, a mis-hit backpass from Stevie G (not his last) and a two-goal injury-time reversal from Zizou himself (punctuated by a cheeky chunder). 6) Dejion Taylor takes riding a mini-scooter to extreme new levels. Elsewhere, Brazil’s Gui Khury makes skateboarding history with a 1080-degree turn on a vertical ramp. Did we mention he’s 11 years old? 1) Highlights of the many world records in men’s athletics. And those from women’s athletics. 2) After more K-League action? Here’s a primer and a showreel of 2019’s top marksman, Australia’s Adam Taggart. 3) In the absence of live sport, satire fills the gap. Here’s The Onion’s roundup of underreported sports, including Evander Holyfield against a horse. SportsDome! 4) A classic Cristiano Ronaldo humdinger, for United against Porto in 2009. Spotters’ badges: whobroughtoranges, bowboysammy, salfordexile66 Do subscribe, if you fancy. Do subscribe, if you fancy.