Born in Wales, Myles, 41, has had parts in Doctor Who, Torchwood and Broadchurch, and stars in Keeping Faith which returns for a third series next year. Her new thriller, We Hunt Together, airs on UKTV’s Alibi, available via Sky. She is married to her Keeping Faith costar Bradley Freegard, has two daughters and lives in Cardiff. When were you happiest?When I had my gall bladder out last year; I had gall stones and was in agony for four years. What is your greatest fear?Losing my memory. What is your earliest memory?Eating chips with a homeless man in Porthcawl, a seaside resort in south Wales. I’d got lost and my parents found me sitting with him. I was about four. What is the trait you most deplore in yourself?Anxiety. What is the trait you most deplore in others?Noisy eating. What was your most embarrassing moment?Telling a casting director after a really bad audition that I loved her. Instead of saying goodbye, I shook her hand and said, “I love you.” And, as I left, I couldn’t get out of the big glass door. Eventually she said, “Slide.” So I slid the door then closed it and, instead of just leaving, gave her a double thumbs up. I didn’t get the job. Aside from a property, what’s the most expensive thing you’ve bought?My camper van. What is your most treasured possession?My children. What makes you unhappy?My tax bill. If you could bring something extinct back to life, what would you choose?Johnny Cash. Who would play you in the film of your life?I’d like to think Emily Blunt. What did you want to be when you were growing up?An adult. What is top of your bucket list?To write a successful series. What is your guiltiest pleasure?Gin and chips. What or who is the greatest love of your life?My husband. We met when I was 16 at the National Youth Theatre of Wales. We were best friends for about four or five years before we got together. How often do you have sex?As often as I’m allowed. What has been your closest brush with the law?When I was about nine, there was an apple tree in the garden and a phone box opposite. I was up in that tree most days with a pellet gun, and people using the phone box complained they were getting shot. The police came and I was caught red-handed. What keeps you awake at night?Writing. What song would you like played at your funeral?Ring Of Fire by Johnny Cash. What is the most important lesson life has taught you?That kindness, respect and a tiny bit of naughtiness are good for you. Where would you most like to be right now?Sitting on the beach in Tenby.