New Zealand’s Labour party led by Jacinda Ardern, the prime minister, has skyrocketed in popularity, climbing 14 percentage points to 56.5%, meaning it would be in a position to govern without coalition partners if it won the next election. Ardern herself has become the most popular New Zealand prime minister in a century, climbing up 20.8 points to 59.5%. She told Newshub it was a “privileged opportunity to be leading at this time”. The general election is scheduled for 19 September despite pleas from the opposition National party and others to postpone it to November due to the Covid-19 crisis. “This is the voter’s verdict on the prime minister’s handling of Covid-19,” said Newshub’s Tova O’Brien. “It doesn’t get much more emphatic than that.” The poll also gauged public sentiment in the final days of the country’s level 3 lockdown, with 92% of respondents saying the strict measures that severely curbed daily life were the right call. The opposition leader, National’s Simon Bridges, has vowed to hold on to his job until election day despite being described as “politically a dead man walking”. Bridges’ party slumped to 30.6% in a poll released on Monday, the first public survey since the arrival of Covid-19. That figure is 13 points lower than National’s last poll return and its result at the 2017 election, meaning roughly one in every three National voters has signalled they will vote elsewhere in the 19 September election. It has brought pressure on National’s party room to consider replacing the 43-year-old as leader, and pressure on Bridges to resign. The Tauranga MP, speaking on Tuesday to the rightwing radio presenter Mike Hosking, said: “I’m the leader and I’m staying that way.” Bridges said incumbents around the world had enjoyed poll bumps in the wake of Covid-19 and predicted it would not last. “You go to Trump. You go to Boris. You go to anywhere in Australia,” he said. “In lockdown we’ve had wall-to-wall coverage of the government and the health aspects. But that’s not an election campaign. We’re going to to see things turn very much from the health response to the economic. National has the team, the track record and the plan under me to get New Zealand working again.” But the National-aligned lobbyist and commentator Matthew Hooton told Radio NZ “there is no way back from this for National unless they make some radical changes”. “Clearly the leadership has failed,” he said. “There are plenty of areas to criticise the government’s handling of [COVID-19] but when Simon Bridges does it, it falls on deaf ears. It just doesn’t connect with people.” Hooton says Judith Collins, a 61-year-old former justice minister and two-time leadership ballot loser, was the likely rival for Mr Bridges. “She’s got a well-recognised name and a well-recognised style of politics [and] to a certain extent she’s almost entitled to it. “If National act rationally they will wait to see what happens [in further polling due out on Thursday]. If that poll is also terrible on Thursday night then I would suspect Bridges will come under huge pressure to resign on Tuesday week.” With Australian Associated Press