Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: The Spanish prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, has announced that tourism from foreign visitors will be allowed from July. Sánchez said the Spanish government would “guarantee” the tourists would not bring the virus to Spain, although it is unclear exactly what measures will be taken. Sánchez said that central and regional governments had been planning the reopening of the tourist industry for weeks, as he encouraged Spaniards to plan domestic holidays and told overseas visitors that “Spain will be waiting for you from July”. Dominic Cummings has said he will “obviously not” resign over reports that he broke lockdown restrictions in March. Transport secretary Grant Shapps told the UK’s daily coronavirus briefing that Boris Johnson’s top aide had the prime minister’s full support, and denied reports that Cummings was spoken to by the police over the alleged rule breaking. Shapps also told the briefing that 36,675 people had died in the UK across all settings, including hospitals and care homes, an increase of 282 fatalities since Friday. Spanish football’s La Liga will return after a three-month break in the week beginning 8 June, with plans to restart the first division with the Seville derby on 12 June. Announcing the restart, prime minister Sánchez said that the “worst has passed” in Spain, and that the country was now at “the end of the tunnel”. Iran has begun reopening businesses, religious and cultural sites on the eve of Eid al-Fitr, and announced that all workers in the country will return to work from next Saturday. Museums and historical sites are set to reopen on Sunday, in order to coincide with the celebrations that end Ramadan, the Muslim holy fasting month, and saints’ shrines will reopen on Monday. The governor of New York has signed an order allowing up to 10 people to assemble as long as they stay at least six feet from each other or wear face masks if they must stand closer – an easing of the state’s ban on gathering in groups. People in New York City were also told they could visit beaches this weekend, but that they are not allowed to swim. Researchers in Thailand have begun testing a coronavirus vaccine on monkeys after a positive trial in mice. The country’s minister of higher education, science and research and innovation, Suvit Maesincee, said researchers hoped to have a “clearer outcome” of the effectiveness of the vaccine by September. It is one of at least 100 vaccines being developed worldwide. Authorities in Malaysia have confirmed that there has been another outbreak of coronavirus cases in a detention centre for undocumented migrants. The Semenyih detention centre near the capital of Kuala Lumpur, which houses around 1,600 detainees, has reported 21 new cases of Covid-19. Earlier this week, 60 cases were reported among 1,400 detainees at the Bukit Jalil centre.