A seven-year-old boy asked his father “who’s next Daddy? Is it going to be you or is it going to be me?”, after his mother and grandmother died with coronavirus four days apart. Chris Cadby lost his wife Julianne, 49, after her own mother, Joan, 84, died on Easter Sunday. Both deaths were linked to Covid-19. Cadby, from Cardiff, told Sky News: “I had to find the strength to tell our son, Evan, what had happened. It was heartbreaking as I had only just told him a few days earlier his nanny had died. He hadn’t seen his mum for a week because she had been suffering with the virus.” Cadby had also been in hospital with coronavirus, and Evan had had to stay with Cadby’s brother-in-law. The schoolboy tested positive but has not had any symptoms. Other recent victims include a doctor from the Manchester Royal Infirmary who had switched from his normal role as a plastic surgeon to treating patients with coronavirus. Furqan Ali Siddiqui died on Thursday and is survived by six children, who live in Pakistan with his wife, Fazia, who is also a doctor. A spokesperson for Manchester University NHS foundation trust said: “It is with great sadness that we can announce the death of a member of staff who worked at Wythenshawe hospital. “Dr Furqan Ali Siddiqui was a clinical fellow in our burns and plastics department at Wythenshawe hospital and sadly died on 30 April. He was being treated for Covid-19. We extend our sincere condolences and deepest sympathies to Furqan’s family and all our thoughts are with them at this incredibly difficult time.” At Southampton general hospital, Thursday’s Clap for Carers was held in honour of a linen porter who had worked there for more than 20 years. Mike Brown, 61, had tested positive for coronavirus and died in hospital while receiving treatment, a spokesperson for University Hospital Southampton NHS foundation trust confirmed. Paula Head, the chief executive of University Hospital Southampton, said: “He was well recognised and popular with so many staff. Once nominated by colleagues for a Hospital Heroes award for always going above and beyond, he shared his good sense of humour with everyone around. “Our thoughts are with Mike’s partner, Sandy, and his family. He will remain fondly in our thoughts, particularly those of his close colleagues and the staff he worked with on the wards regularly.”