At the beginning of the week, I chatted to Lea, my darling mother-in-law in Wellington, New Zealand. A first-time online grocery buyer, she had ordered three carrots – but then 3kg of them arrived at her door. We were throwing up ideas about what to do with them. Our solutions: quick vinegar brine pickle, carrot kraut, roasted carrots confit, carrot juice – it’s safe to say she’ll be good for beta-carotene for a while. Lea is not alone. Once you have stepped off the baking train – because really how many more cakes, loaves of sourdough and crumpets can you eat before your blood sugar levels decide to stay permanently spiked – you might find yourself ordering mystery produce boxes for the fun of it. Full disclosure: I am also a purveyor of one such mystery box. Our Boon Luck Farm in Byron has been growing organic heirloom produce for some of Australia’s well known restaurants. Those restaurants have temporarily closed, so they’re no longer ordering what we specifically grow for them. I’m in the same boat as every primary producer whose main business is restaurants. Now the world over, home cooks have direct access to previously hard to procure lobsters, prime cuts of reserved Wagyu, or tiger striped jungle peanuts. Things that are usually snapped up by chefs for their tasting menus. Never before has it been more fun to cook at home. The creative uses for some of the produce that I am seeing is refreshing, but some produce can be harder to use or use up, and leaves people completely stumped. Lots of online stores will allow you select the contents – but I urge you to support your local small-scale farmers and buy a grab-bag direct from them, as you will get the freshest seasonal produce with the proceeds going straight to the source. Besides, it’s more fun that way. First, lay everything on your kitchen table or bench. Group the produce like for like: brassicas, lettuces, fruits, herbs, roots etc. Then do as chefs do: wrap them up appropriately for storage, don’t wash anything unless you are ready to use it (as it will likely bruise or accelerate the decomposition of the vegetable), and do not pre-cut anything you won’t use that day, as the more surface area something has, the faster it dries out. Wrap your herbs in a moist paper towel, and put anything with leaves into your crisper. Apples, grapes, squashes, cucumbers, leeks, fennel and anything you want crisp goes into the fridge. Pears and avocados depend on the stage of ripeness – if they’re soft, put them into the fridge, otherwise leave them on the bench to ripen more. Citrus, bananas, pumpkins, onions, garlic and potatoes are best left out. If you want to speed up the ripening of bananas and avocados, pop them together in a paper bag – the natural ethanol released will work very well. Pull out pencil and paper and get planning your week’s menu and larder staples. You may just find this becomes a highlight of your week, and perhaps the habit will even stick around when the restaurants start opening up again. Fermenting: If you received a whole cabbage, unless you are a large family you won’t finish it off in a week – so portion out what you can eat. With the rest, wash it, weigh it up, add 3% of the total weight in salt and get massaging. Let it sit for an hour and then drain excess liquid, put it in a sterilised glass jar and let it ferment on the kitchen bench until sour. Then refrigerate it – et voilà sauerkraut. Date it so you know when it was made. The things that can be lacto fermented include but are not limited to: all manner of brassicas (bok choy, cabbage, rapini), carrots, parsnips, swedes, fennel bulbs, beetroot, celery, and even fruit like melon rinds and apples. Get inspired to include aromats like dried or fresh herbs, garlic, chillies, ginger, galangal, makrut lime leaves and even citrus peel. Freezing: With pumpkins and sweet potatoes, once the season starts it seems to never end. There’s a reason that grocers sell things by halves, like celery, watermelons and pumpkins. If you are going to cook with a pumpkin or sweet potato, don’t just cut the wedge you plan on eating tonight. Cook and process the whole lot. By processing I mean steaming or roasting. Then portion it out into 250g servings and freeze it. Having these on hand means you can defrost to instantly make a soup, curry, warm salad, frittata or even make custard to fill a pie. Don’t be afraid to freeze things; most defrost well enough, and need only a little warming in the oven before you can use them. Once it’s been reheated, use it straight away as refreezing isn’t a good idea. Things that can steamed or roasted, then frozen, include peppers, beetroot, carrots, potatoes, swedes, parsnips, onions (best roasted) and most root vegetables. I almost always roast veg with olive oil, grey salt and whole bulbs of garlic de-cloved. The rule is always low and slow. When you come to portion everything out, separate the excess oil and garlic cloves and put them into a jar. This will create a flavoured oil to use in salad dressing, or even for finishing off meats, soups and casseroles. Mashing the roasted garlic on toast is a particular delight. Some greens need long slow cooking times, some need just a quick blanch or stir fry and some are just best left alone to eat raw in a salad. Slow braising Woodier greens like cavolo nero, silver beet, radish tops, the tops of any root veg, chicory, cardoons and artichokes (I know they’re not leafy greens but still need to be mentioned) benefit from longer braising. This requires homemade stock or water and olive oil in a 3:1 ratio, plus salt and garlic. At the end of the long simmer, finish off with something acidic like vinegar or citrus. The time depends on the toughness of the leaves, but I find that anything needing a braise longer than 20-30 minutes isn’t worth eating. This is a deliciously universal way of cooking vegetables that are a little woodier and benefit from being eaten on the softer side – do not be concerned if the greens turn olive or even brown. Brown food is delicious. Keep adjusting the liquid as you go, not allowing the greens to be swamped, and likewise not drying them out. I really like to finish off a longer braise like this with a contrast of something fresh in at the end, like freshly shelled or frozen peas and a generous fistful of chopped fresh herbs – like flat-leafed parsley. I love eating these greens as a side to some protein, or even a main meal with a fried egg. It also keeps very well refrigerated to snack on later, or to put on toast that you’ve rubbed with the garlic confit I mentioned earlier. Quick cooking These techniques are for softer greens that are just too horrid to eat raw – water spinach, in fact all spinach, Asian brassicas like Chinese broccoli, choy sum, and even lettuces. By cooking them you will actually unlock more of their nutrients, especially if you add a citric element to it at the end. Either a quick stir fry with some rendered pork fat or a healthy oil like olive or macadamia and chopped garlic and a simple seasoning, or blanching and steaming, work well. For stir frying, let your wok or pan heat up first, add your fat and wait a minute, or use this time to chop up your garlic. If steaming or blanching, leave the water on high until it is full-on boiling then add the vegetables to cook – very minimally. Even once you’ve turned off the heat, the vegetables will still be cooking, so bear that in mind. I tend to turn the heat off just before I think the vegetables are at point I like to eat them, because the transition time from cooking to plating will make those veggies exactly right. Greens to keep raw Lettuces, salad mixes, radicchio, endive, softer hearts of certain chicories, celery hearts and leaves, sorrel, edible weeds like pennywort, purslane and cranberry hibiscus are all best left cold. Don’t forget that even in the raw state, when you add oils, acid and salt, you are essentially cooking it minimally. I could eat salads till the cows come home, and there are a million ways to make it. All you need for inspiration is to taste what is in season and remember the tenets of flavour profiles – salty, sour, sweet, bitter and fat – when you are composing a salad. Add a little of each, tasting as you go. Don’t forget that you can always add larder staples like nuts, fresh or dried fruits, cooked grains or cheeses. Layer your sour notes by using different vinegars, citrus juice and zest. Don’t forget there are many ways to salt your food that don’t even include salt, like fish sauce, anchovies, shrimp paste, Vegemite, seaweed and other sea vegetables, miso, soy sauce or even nutritional yeast. Pull out your frozen roasted vegetables and add those too. Use up odds and ends such as off-cuts and peels of carrots, daikon, parsnip, onions, garlic peel, celery and mushrooms in bone stocks (my tip is to roast the bones first for a deeper flavour). These can be portioned out and kept frozen (250mls is my preferred size). If I don’t have quite enough to make a large pot, I save everything up in the freezer first until I do. Making stock can feel like a commitment – it is – but once you’ve finished washing that big pot and your freezer is well stocked up with the future potential of soups, curries, ragu and the like, you will feel an immense satiety. Water kefir is another great way to use up bits and bobs from fruit. Feeding the grains and drinking the byproduct is a source of continual entertainment and probiotics. Water kefir grains can be bought online; I like the Fermentary. Figuring out what to feed my water kefir grains, and the trial and error of flavour combinations, is a source of real joy for me at the moment – lemongrass is a winner, for instance. Cooking from a mystery box is an adventure – the best thing to do is to take a deep breath and dive right in.