Antony & CleopatraA tremendous cast ensured that the huge Olivier was sold out for Simon Godwin’s modern-dress production two years ago. Ralph Fiennes and Sophie Okonedo star as the lovers, with strong support from Katy Stephens as Agrippa and Tim McMullan as a revelatory Enobarbus. Available to stream for seven days from Thursday, 7pm on the National Theatre’s YouTube channel. Susannah Clapp What the Butler Saw“Society is presented as a madhouse controlled by lunatics” – the late, great theatre scholar Christopher Innes could be describing today’s news programmes. In fact, he’s referring to Joe Orton’s wild farces, with their outrageous humour and anarchic energy. This 2017 production, from Curve, Leicester and Theatre Royal Bath, marked the 50th anniversary of the playwright’s death. The subtitled recording, available at curveonline.co.uk for the duration of lockdown, captures a live performance, using a single, static camera: simple, but so effective. Clare Brennan Hayley Williams’ album Paramore’s erstwhile frontwoman embraces left-field pop on her “very necessary” solo debut, Petals for Armor, in which she tackles depression and accountability. Out on Friday (8 May). Kitty Empire The Listening Service: Talking in MusicTom Service dives deep into the place where talking and singing meet. Crossing genres, the programme flits from Mozart to hip-hop via the timeless swagger of Sprechgesang (“speech-singing”) and how minimalist composer Steve Reich co-opts spoken words into melodies. Today, Radio 3, 5pm. KE Sound Walk to Hay-on-WyeTake a screen break with a four-hour Bank Holiday virtual ramble: 10 miles along Offa’s Dyke and the Black Mountain ridge, with orchestral music by Welsh composers William Mathias and Alun Hoddinott, plus poetry and folk song, presented by Horatio Clare. Slow radio at its best. Friday 8 May, BBC Radio 3, from 1pm. Fiona Maddocks The WhistlersThe Romanian new wave meets film noir in Corneliu Porumboiu’s twisty, playful untangling of a heist gone haywire in the Canary Islands. On Curzon Home Cinema from Friday. Guy Lodge An Art Lovers’ Guide: St PetersburgMarvellous city tour, from the beauty of the Winter Palace to the jewelled extravagance of Fabergé and the glories of Russian art in the State Museum, with art experts Janina Ramirez and Alastair Sooke. BBC Four, Wednesday 6 May, 11pm. Laura Cumming ICA DailyAn infinite variety of online offerings, from film and video to artists’ interviews, recommended music, poetry and books. Chosen by ICA curators and friends, it changes daily and has so far brought us live feeds from the International Space Station and the latest photographs by Wolfgang Tillmans. LC The Winter’s TaleChristopher Wheeldon’s second full-length work for the Royal Ballet is a ravishing ravishing adaptation of Shakespeare that – almost miraculously – manages to find a dance language to tell the emotional and complex story. This 2014 recording available via the Royal Opera House on YouTube and Facebook features the exceptional first cast: Edward Watson, Lauren Cuthbertson, Sarah Lamb, Steven McRae, with music by Joby Talbot and design by Bob Crowley. Available on demand until 15 May. Sarah Crompton James Acaster’s Perfect SoundsOn this new podcast, comedian James Acaster tries to convince other invited comedians that 2016 was the best year for music. Echoing sentiments from his book Perfect Sound Whatever, which he wrote after a breakup rekindled his love of pop music, each episode looks at a different album, from Beyoncé’s Lemonade to David Bowie’s Black Star. Friday, BBC Sounds. Kadish Morris  This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.