Midway through the gruelling vaudeville at Tate Modern, among the clamour of shrieking clowns, gagging mouths and tortured violins, you suddenly come upon yourself. Or rather, the ghost of yourself. A video monitor appears to be recording your approaching footsteps. But up close, the screen is only showing the view around the next corner, where another monitor irresistibly beckons. Turn that corner and you glimpse your own departing back, spectral and black on the screen. For a moment, you hardly know whether you’re coming or going. Nor should you know. There is no comfort in the art of Bruce Nauman, no resting place for the confounded brain – not even when his methods are openly declared. What could be clearer, for instance, than a bright neon sign? One Hundred Live and Die is the baldly descriptive title of an epochal work from 1984, a wall of neon instructions that flash on and off: Laugh and Die, Play and Live, Speak and Live, Play and Die. They confront you with all the inanity of the Walk/Don’t Walk signs on US streets. But these injunctions are not just opposites, they are complete contradictions; as if there were no real choices in this world. And there is no freedom for the eye, likewise, in this vision: nothing it can do but follow the slogans as they jump randomly back and forth across the vast blazing grid. Born in Indiana in 1941, Nauman has been thinking about surveillance, mortality, authority and the prison-house of language for almost 50 years. But he began, as this lifetime survey also begins, alone in the studio with his lanky self. Grainy 1960s videos show Nauman walking white lines with exaggerated precision (harder than you think); or swaggering down a narrow corridor with all the contrapposto torsions of some ancient Greek sculpture, arms bent, hips sashaying, in claustrophobic pastiche. He saws away on a violin, tuned to the notes D, E, A and D, the sound excruciatingly tense. He pinches his mouth and neck until they appear horribly estranged. A strange metal plaque dangling from the wall resembles the skin of some peatbog man, long dead. It turns out to be a cast of the artist’s own back, arms tied behind him with a rope. No one visiting this show could fail to notice Nauman’s prodigious influence over contemporary art. The metal sculpture (circa 1967) prefigures the body casts of Antony Gormley, Marc Quinn and more. A video of disembodied hands manipulating balloons into shiny dogs appear to be conjuring sculptures fit for Jeff Koons. Nauman’s neon slogans, word games and caustic utterances have been taken up by artists all over the world. And as for A Cast of the Space Under My Chair (1965-8), everyone knows which sculptor borrowed from that particular idea. A cup of coffee tumbles and spills again and again, on a two-screen diptych, alongside the balloon-twisting hands. Between the one about to crash, and the other to pop, the tension is nearly unbearable. And that is so often the tenor of Nauman’s work. Everything is taken to the edge, ratcheted to the brink – and in every kind of medium. Walk through these galleries, and you keep hearing distant screams and a kind of thrumming howl-around. Some seem to derive from primitive CCTV, others from multi-screen installations such as the notorious Clown Torture from 1987. How prophetic they look now, these horrendous visions of white-faced clowns in demonic makeup, furiously shouting and shoving, stuck on the lavatory, or trying to balance objects on their trademark sweeping brushes. Clowns are not funny; the point is stressed over and again, to a soundtrack of guttural rage. Listen carefully, in the vile soup of noises, and you can just about make out the circular joke the clown is forced to repeat in hysterical frustration: “Pete and Repeat were sitting on a fence. Pete fell off. Who was left? Repeat” and so on and on, until your head explodes. Who is the more tortured: clown or viewer? Unlike them, we have the power to walk away. Nauman’s art is an endurance test by other means. The worst experience here, or at least the one that exerts the most unbearable pressure, is surely Anthro/Socio, featuring the spinning head of a bald actor on numerous screens, larger, smaller, upside down, but always shouting his head off (so to speak). “Feed me, eat me, anthropology.” “Help me, hurt me, sociology.” So loud, so aggressive, these primal screams can barely be deciphered. A baby, a Caliban, a psycho, an everyman; he won the game, whoever he was, because I swiftly left. There is an awful energy to these escalations, loops and repetitions. Outside the show, Nauman’s film of hands vigorously washing themselves above a filthy studio sink becomes an OCD spectacle. Inside, Musical Chairs involves a group of metal objects, somewhat resembling furniture, but upon which no human being could ever sit, suspended from the ceiling like hanged men. Nauman once said he wanted his art to be 'like getting hit in the face with a baseball bat' This is a somewhat reverent account of Nauman’s career, intent on all the art history highlights. I wish it had shown a little more of his humour (Self-portrait as a Fountain) and his melancholy later works, which are addressed to the heart more than the brain. Some of the installations need to be shown in far deeper darkness than these plague times permit; and the soundtracks often bleed too heavily from one room to the next. But there are moments of quiet absorption. The final gallery is devoted to a sequence of slow-motion films, in which magicians perform their tricks with mesmerising grace. An egg appears, then vanishes, like a pale moon in outer darkness. A pack of cards is shuffled, and then manipulated with such dexterity that you become almost lost in the ballet. These films are in such gradual close-up, with every possibility of seeing how each trick was performed: yet you still don’t know how they did it as the film begins again. Nauman once said that he wanted the experience of his art to be “like getting hit in the face with a baseball bat … You never see it coming”. The punch can be so disabling as to numb all response. Or it can amaze. The most profound work in this show is a video installation in which the much older Nauman reprises his younger self, pacing the studio as he used to in the olden days, still wearing jeans and a T-shirt. You see him once, twice, many times, walking back and forth; and then, quite suddenly, the real man (as it seems) walks into his own film. Nauman returns to his youth, re-entering the past through art – and then vanishing into his own illusion. • At Tate Modern until 21 February