Bayern Munich want to sign Callum Hudson-Odoi on loan before the transfer window shuts on Monday and have held talks with Chelsea about a deal for the 19-year-old winger. The Bundesliga champions tried to buy Hudson-Odoi before the youngster committed his future to Chelsea last year, signing a deal worth £120,000 a week, and have maintained their interest in the player. Bayern would like to bolster their options in the wide positions, even though they have already signed Leroy Sané to compete with Serge Gnabry and Kingsley Coman. Hudson-Odoi has had a difficult time since suffering an achilles injury in April 2019. He has not been a regular starter for Frank Lampard and Chelsea’s manager did not rule out the possibility of the academy graduate leaving on loan last week. Lampard has called the England international’s workrate into question on several occasions. It is understood a deal to take Hudson-Odoi to Bayern would not be easy to complete in such a short space of time. Another complication is that Hudson-Odoi is not desperate to leave Chelsea, who could decide to keep a player regarded as one of the best young talents in Europe. He has started twice for Chelsea in the Carabao Cup this season and impressed after coming off the bench against West Brom last week, scoring a fine goal as they fought back from a goal down to rescue a point. However, there are doubts over whether Hudson-Odoi will play regularly enough this season and a move before Monday night has not been ruled out. It is not clear if any deal would contain an option or obligation for the European champions to buy the winger at the end of the season. Meanwhile, Lampard has dismissed suggestions Mason Mount is receiving special treatment because he is a homegrown player, saying the midfielder is a regular starter because of his attitude, fitness and talent. Lampard has placed his faith in Mount since arriving at Stamford Bridge and is aware some people feel he is showing favouritism towards the academy graduate. The 21-year-old, who was a key player for Lampard while on loan at Derby two seasons ago, played 53 times after breaking into the first team last season and has featured in every minute of this campaign. “There’s a fascination with Mason, he’s homegrown and he’s a young player who’s got regularly into the team,” Lampard said. “I understand sometimes that when you are homegrown and a young player there can be elements of people who look at that and ask questions as to why he’s been playing so many games. I do understand the situation. What will overcome everything is Mason’s talent and attitude.” Mount’s bigger workload is partly down to issues with Chelsea’s other attacking midfielders. Kai Havertz is settling in after signing from Bayer Leverkusen and Ross Barkley has joined Aston Villa on loan. Christian Pulisic – who is in the squad for Saturday’s home game against Crystal Palace – and the summer arrival from Ajax, Hakim Ziyech, have been injured. “In terms of relying on Mason a lot last year that’s just the way the season panned out,” Lampard said. “Now when we’ve had a start with multiple quarantines through the group, players coming in with five days’ training that are new signings, players that are injured, I’ve relied on Mason and his natural fitness in the early games.” Mount, who missed the decisive penalty in Chelsea’s defeat at Tottenham in the Carabao Cup on Tuesday, has impressed Lampard with his attitude. “That’s part of the great thing about working with someone who has that mindset. What I want to see is the competition that has arrived around him makes him raise his level.” Internazionale are keen on taking Marcos Alonso on loan following the Spaniard’s half-time row with Lampard during last week’s draw with West Brom but they could move for another Chelsea left-back, Emerson Palmieri. Lampard added that Ruben Loftus-Cheek may stay at Chelsea following Barkley’s move but he gave no update on Antonio Rüdiger’s situation. Paris Saint-Germain and Tottenham have been linked with the defender and West Ham are interested. Chelsea could look at alternatives to West Ham’s Declan Rice as they try to land a defensive midfielder. One option could be Atlético Madrid’s Thomas Partey, who has a £45m release clause.