For most of the past two decades, Australia has run “offshore processing centres” in the small Pacific countries of Nauru and Papua New Guinea (PNG). These centres – described as “torture” by refugees and asylum seekers who have been forced to live in them – have been condemned in countless independent reports from doctors, human rights experts, UN agencies and parliamentary inquiries. So news that the UK government may develop its own offshore system is alarming. Australia’s experience demonstrates that offshore processing breaks people, destroys lives and shatters the possibility of hope for the future. The UK government is wrong to imply that Brexit would greenlight offshore processing The idea of externalised asylum processing has been debated in Europe for the past 35 years. The UK has been a key proponent (alongside Denmark, the Netherlands, Italy and Spain) under both Tory and Labour governments, with the Australian model – and its US precedent – providing direct inspiration. In 2003, the Blair government proposed to establish refugee processing centres outside Europe, but these were ultimately rejected by other European Union (EU) member states – not least given their non-compliance with international law. The UK government itself acknowledged it would need to withdraw from both the UN Refugee Convention and the European Convention on Human Rights to avoid violating the law. The current UK government is wrong to imply that Brexit (and release from the EU asylum directives) would greenlight offshore processing. The UK’s obligations under international law and European human rights law remain. For any offshore processing scheme to be lawful, the human rights and protection needs of all asylum seekers, refugees and migrants who encounter it must be respected. This includes procedures to identify – case by case – whether people will be at risk of persecution or other serious harm in the country where the centre is located (or in any other place to which that country might send them). This can be very time-consuming and resource-intensive. EU experience shows that it can take longer for a transfer decision to be made than for a substantive asylum claim to be considered. As a matter of international law, governments cannot outsource legal responsibility for asylum seekers simply by moving them somewhere else. At a minimum, asylum seekers must not be sent back to serious harm, and must have access to a fair, impartial refugee status determination procedure and be able to find a safe, durable solution to their plight. Special attention must be given to children, the elderly, pregnant women, and sufferers of torture or trauma. Far from providing answers to these legal complications, Australia’s offshore processing arrangements underscore the problems. First, the model does not work. When Australia reintroduced offshore processing in 2012, it was intended to be a “circuit breaker” to deter increasing numbers of asylum seekers coming by boat. But the opposite happened: more people arrived in the first 10 months of the policy than at any other time in Australian history. Within three months, the forecasted capacity of the offshore detention centres had been exceeded, meaning the majority of those who came would never be sent offshore. Second, the model kicks the problem down the road. Of the 3,127 people sent to PNG and Nauru, about 360 remain in limbo – even though most of them have officially been recognised as refugees. Some have been languishing there for as long as seven years. More than a thousand others were medically evacuated back to Australia on account of critical health concerns that could not be treated offshore. The Australian government refuses to allow any offshore refugee to settle permanently in Australia, and neither Nauru nor PNG offers long-term options, which means Australia needs other countries to come to the rescue. More than 700 refugees have been resettled in the United States under a one-off deal brokered by Barack Obama, but that option is not available to all. Third, people held offshore have been subjected to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment – even torture, according to former detainee and writer Behrouz Boochani. When the first groups of people were forcibly transferred to Nauru and PNG’s Manus Island, they were forced to live in hot tents, ill-suited to the climate, infested with insects and rats, subject to blistering heating in the day, flooding in tropical storms, and no privacy. A steady deterioration in people’s mental and physical health ensued. Their suffering has been described by medical experts as the worst they have seen – worse than in war zones and refugee camps around the world. The cumulative rate of mental illness is more than 80%. Refugee children as young as seven have displayed suicidal behaviour. Many have been exposed to physical and sexual abuse; some have self-harmed. With no hopes for the future, they display signs of traumatic withdrawal (or resignation) syndrome. One affected child was finally evacuated from Nauru unconscious, having gradually stopped speaking, eating and drinking. Indeed, despite – or in fact, because of – Australia’s hardline approach, thousands of refugees have had to be medically evacuated to Australia. Many refugees have been more traumatised by the hopeless conditions offshore than by the trauma occasioned by the persecutors they fled. Finally, offshore processing costs Australian taxpayers more than 50 times as much as letting asylum seekers live in the community. For a time, this expenditure rose at a rate of 129% annually. The government has spent A$7.6bn to keep 3,000 people confined in abysmal conditions – a costly warning to others who might dare to seek Australia’s sanctuary. Australia has “gotten away” with successive and continuing human rights violations because it has no constitutionally guaranteed charter of rights, nor any regional human rights treaty or court against or by which its conduct can be assessed. The UK, as a party to the European Convention on Human Rights, would not be able to evade its legal responsibilities in the same way. A successful refugee policy not only manages national borders, but it also protects people who need safety. Australia’s offshore processing regime has caused extreme trauma. It has cost billions of dollars that could have gone towards more effective and humane alternatives. It should not be replicated. Ever. Jane McAdam is scientia professor of law and director of the Kaldor Centre for International Refugee Law, UNSW Sydney. Madeline Gleeson is a senior research associate at the Kaldor Centre and the author of Offshore: Behind the Wire on Manus and Nauru (NewSouth Publishing, 2016).