Rishi Sunak’s brief address to the Conservative party conference contained no new announcements but revealed the underlying thinking behind the government’s approach to the economy. The problem was not that he spoke so briefly – but that he had so little to say. The chancellor rattled off a list of measures that he said showed the government had acted at a scale commensurate with the challenges the country faces. Above all, he praised himself for his furlough scheme that he said had saved millions of jobs. In a bizarre flourish of hyperbole, Sunak claimed that this was the first time that people had realised government could be helpful. A bold claim in a country with a welfare state, public education, roads, police and a national health service. Apparently he takes Britain’s entire public sector for granted. Sunak solemnly declared that his single priority was to “create, support and extend opportunity to as many people as I can”. Back in the real world, Cineworld announced the closure of 127 cinemas and the loss of as many as 5,500 jobs in the UK, and the chancellor showed no signs of reversing the decision to scrap the furlough scheme that has been in place since March. Attempting to justify the scheme’s hasty closure, Sunak channelled George Osborne by saying he would “protect the public finances”, that reducing public borrowing was a “sacred duty” to future generations, and that the country could not “borrow its way out of any hole”. It was a stark reminder that this tired government is not new and has been in power for more than a decade. Recognising that Covid-19 would causes structural shifts in the economy, Sunak said he would help people with a heavily briefed promise of new job coaches to re-skill and enter new sectors. They even have a daft acronym – Jets or “job entry targeted support” – which shows the sophisticated thinking behind the scheme. Job coaches are the equivalent of making a cup of tea rather than calling an ambulance after a serious industrial accident. Not an intrinsically harmful act, but one that fundamentally misunderstands the gravity of the situation. The policy implies that employment is primarily a function of individual effort – the outcome of skill levels and willingness to adapt – rather than of the health of the economy as a whole. This nonsense is plainly wrong, and never more obviously so than in the middle of the current crisis. Increasingly detached from the reality of Britain’s present economic circumstances, Sunak intoned that “in a free market economy, the entrepreneur is critical”. But the problem in the UK economy right now is that millions of people are staying at home because of a public health emergency. The fundamental issue is a collapse in demand for goods and services. Demand was already chronically deficient as a result of a decade of austerity policies and now has tumbled to new lows. As other European governments extend the duration of their furlough schemes and the virus is resurgent, with a second wave, this is no time to switch off life support for the economy. As job losses accelerate, millions face fear and uncertainty about their economic prospects, as well as about the threats to their health. The chancellor said he had “never been blind” to the difficulties faced by people across the nation, that he would not let “talent wither” and that there was still hope. But today’s speech seemed to prove precisely the inverse. As the nights draw in and public health measures tighten once again, the chancellor needs to do better – and quickly. The alternative is that millions of people will suffer hardship that could and should have been avoided. Tom Kibasi is a writer and researcher on politics and economics