Elliot Daly has been omitted from England’s 32-man training squad for Sunday’s clash with the Barbarians due to an unspecified injury. Also missing is Joe Marler, whose knee problem will take at least another two weeks to heal, meaning he will sit out the Barbarians clash and climax to the 2020 Six Nations against Italy six days later when England are playing for the title. “Elliot has had a bump on his leg – I was speaking to him this morning – for a good period of time,” head coach Eddie Jones reported. “It hasn’t really worried him and he’s been able to train. We’re not sure what’s wrong so we’re going to get some tests done and we’ll wait and see what the answer is. “I’d rather not say which part of his leg, let’s just wait and see. We’ll do all the various tests and he will see a consultant and then we’ll have a pretty good idea of where he’s at.” Jones added: “Joe [Marler] is coming along really well. He’s maybe another two or three weeks away from being available for selection, but he’s come in and added to the camp and is his usual effervescent self,”. Jones names his team to face the Barbarians on Friday, adopting a different approach to the usual policy of picking a younger side for a fixture that was postponed from May because of the coronavirus epidemic. The good news for Jones is that Piers Francis is back having recovered from coronavirus. Francis was picked in Jones’ first squad since the Six Nations earlier this month but was forced to withdraw and self-isolate after testing positive for Covid-19 as a result of playing Sale on 29 September. Tom De Glanville’s hopes of making his England debut in the non-cap international at Twickenham have been dashed following his omission from the 32 who will gather at their training base in south west London. “This is an important game for us and we’re looking forward to getting back to Twickenham and playing rugby,” Jones said. “We’ve had two really good camps, going back to basics and how we want to play. The Barbarians squad has a rich blend of talent, so this week we’ll be testing ourselves under pressure and looking to take our game to the next level.”