This free exhibition, which peppers up works from the National Gallery collection with a handful of spunky loans, reveals how much has changed since the 19th century, when the dazzling Venus – lit up in this show by a Tracey Emin neon – had her erect nipple painted out. In Bronzino’s Allegory with Venus and Cupid, painted in about 1545, the goddess of love cavorts naked with her adolescent son Cupid, who is subtly squeezing that nipple between long slender fingers. Both their bodies are smooth as silk. Their passion holds back time – literally. Father Time is one of a strange crowd of envious onlookers who are helpless to defeat sexual love. When Bronzino’s wicked jewel was bought by the National Gallery in 1860, its director Sir Charles Eastlake told restorers to remove Venus’s nipple and hide the way her tongue glides into Cupid’s mouth (maybe this painting, a gift from the Medici to King Francis I of France, invented French kissing). “It was just A Kiss,” says that adjacent Emin neon, but such a claim clearly didn’t wash with Eastlake. The painting’s brilliance was obscured until it was cleaned of all the bowdlerisations in 1958. So we’ve come a long way, right? Not necessarily, not when it comes to seeing sin in art. We don’t take it seriously. Sin, in its Judeo-Christian concept, has just become a word. It titillates, if anything. Yet most of the paintings in the National Gallery were made in a Europe that was overwhelmingly and actively Christian. Neil MacGregor, when he was director here, addressed this with an epic show called Seeing Salvation. It tried to open our eyes to the religious content of great art. Here, that message is left to Andy Warhol. At the entrance to the show, two paintings by him cry out their scrawled text like a prophet of doom on a street corner: “Repent and sin no more!” Warhol was the last great Catholic artist. All through his Factory years, he devoutly attended mass and secretly helped at soup kitchens. He created this and other religious artworks in the mid-80s shortly before his sudden death in 1987. They seemed ironic but weren’t. He might have appreciated the paintings in this show that illustrate Catholic ideas about sin, especially The Immaculate Conception by Velázquez with its positively Warholian eye for cheap religious imagery. Like a polychrome statue in a Spanish church, the Virgin Mary stands aloft, praying in her shiny sinlessness. But a real young woman has posed for Velázquez and his powerful portrayal of her fleshly face collides with the propaganda he has been commissioned to paint. So everyone but Mary was born in sin and even those who escaped hell must serve time in purgatory, yet you could get time off by purchasing an “indulgence”. A painting by the late medieval Master of Saint Gilles opens a window on this world, where sin and forgiveness controlled the faithful. It’s set inside the ornate Paris church of St Denis, where the Gothic style was invented. The emperor Charlemagne kneels at its golden altar, tormented by a sin too terrible to confess, but an angel comes down from the vaults bearing his written indulgence, direct from God. A few years after this was painted, Pope Julius II ordered a special sale of indulgences in Germany to pay for the rebuilding of St Peter’s. A monk called Martin Luther had had enough of this crap and started the Reformation by insisting that sin is not something you can escape from with any easy clerical nostrum – not even by working in a soup kitchen like Warhol. Only divine mercy will save us born sinners. When Luther rejected priestly celibacy to get married, his best man was the artist Lucas Cranach. The new Protestant sense of sin makes Cranach’s depiction of Adam and Eve one of the strangest paintings here. His Adam looks lustily at Eve, plainly tempted not only by the apple she has plucked from the one tree God said not to touch, but by her small fruit-like breasts. Next to this hangs Cranach’s Venus, an even more explicitly erotic nude. How come this artist, who was good friends with no less a Christian than Luther, paints naked women – as if he was the Helmut Newton of the 16th century? It’s precisely because he was a Lutheran who believed in original sin that Cranach painted the most provocative nudes of the Renaissance. He has no illusions about the nude. Looking at naked bodies is not some disinterested aesthetic pursuit. This is about sex, says Cranach, and sex is soooo sinful. Between them, Protestantism and the Renaissance created the modern western attitude to images and desire that is so tangled, troubled and compulsive. If it wasn’t a sin, says Bronzino to the sophisticates of the French court, would it be any fun? The question hangs there in Emin’s neon glow. • At the National Gallery, London, until 3 January.