Rescue teams in Vietnam have used heavy machinery to search for survivors buried under landslides triggered by torrential rains from Typhoon Molave, one of the strongest typhoons to hit the region for decades, the government said. The landslides, which hit remote areas in the central province of Quang Nam a day earlier, have killed at least 15 and 38 people are missing with rescue efforts hampered by bad weather at the tail end of the storm, the government said. Hundreds of soldiers drafted into the disaster-hit area dug up eight bodies on Thursday morning in Tra Van in south central Quang Nam province where a hillside collapsed on houses. The victims had taken shelter in the community as the typhoon approached, the official Vietnam News Agency reported. In Tra Leng, another village about 45km (28 miles) from Tra Van, another landslide buried a community with several houses occupied by about 45 people, including four who managed to escape. Rescuers have recovered three bodies and were scrambling to save others, Vietnam News said. Tra Leng remains inaccessible due to damaged roads and other landslides and government disaster-response teams were using bulldozers and excavators to open up a road to bring in more rescuers and heavy equipment. Trinh Dinh Dung, deputy prime minister, travelled to the site where soldiers were clearing up a landslide with bulldozers and ordered officers to urgently bring in troops to the landslide-hit village. “We must reach the landslide site the fastest way. First, send in more soldiers before we can get the big machine there. We have to reach the area by all means, including by using helicopters,” he said. In all, 19 people have perished in the storms and a total of 64 are missing, including 26 crew members from two fishing boats that sank on Wednesday as the typhoon approached with winds of up to 150km (93 miles) per hour. Since early October, Vietnam has been battered by storms, heavy rains and floods which have affected more than 1 million people. The government said Typhoon Molave had left millions of people without electricity and damaged 56,000 houses. Molave has weakened to a tropical depression after making landfall on Wednesday and is expected to reach Laos later on Thursday. Heavy rain of up to 700 millimetres (27.5 inches) will continue in parts of central Vietnam until Saturday, Vietnam’s weather agency said. Reuters and Associated Press contributed to this report.