Enable’s path towards a historic third victory in the Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe on Sunday looks significantly easier following the news that Love, her main rival in the betting since her win in the Oaks at Epsom, has been withdrawn from the race due to softening ground in Paris. Aidan O’Brien, Love’s trainer, scratched the dual Classic winner on Thursday morning, a few minutes before the draw for stall positions in Sunday’s race. She replaced Enable as the favourite for the Arc in early July at around 5-2 and maintained her position at the head of the market until earlier this week, when she drifted out to 7-2 as heavy rain arrived at Longchamp. “We had to make the decision today because there was no other stage after this,” O’Brien said. “If Ryan [Moore, his stable jockey] was declared to ride her he couldn’t then ride anything else [if Love was withdrawn], so we had to make the decision today. “It’s 4.1 in the penetrometer at the moment and there is a lot of rain forecast, it could get to 4.5 so we had to make a choice. Sadly, I don’t think there’s any prospect of the ground improving much.” Enable was beaten on very soft ground at Longchamp 12 months ago, when John Gosden, her trainer, suggested that the six-year-old “does not have the same explosive turn of foot” on testing going. However, she also hit the front some way from home before being run down by Waldgeist inside the final furlong and has Group One-winning form on soft ground in the King George at Ascot in 2017. Enable was cut to 6-5 favourite for Sunday’s race by Ladbrokes following the news of Love’s absence from the field, and her chance was further enhanced when she picked up an ideal draw in stall five an hour later. O’Brien, meanwhile, still has four runners in the 15-strong field but all are at double-figure odds, including Serpentine, the runaway winner of the Derby in July, at 11-1. Japan (12-1), Mogul (16-1) and Sovereign (40-1) complete the team from O’Brien’s Ballydoyle stable. “We just don’t know how the others will go on it,” O’Brien said. “When the ground gets that soft, you just can’t predict. It’s a shame the ground has gone like that, but that’s the way it goes, nobody can control it.”