Karim Benzema scored twice as Real Madrid moved back to the top of the La Liga table with a 4-1 victory over Huesca. Eden Hazard and Benzema each netted just before the interval, and Federico Valverde made it 3-0 before David Ferreiro’s reply with little more than 15 minutes to go. Benzema added his second late on as Zinedine Zidane’s men moved up from third to go two points clear at the top ahead of Real Sociedad, who face Celta Vigo on Sunday. After coming off the bench in Tuesday’s 2-2 Champions League draw at Borussia Mönchengladbach, Hazard was handed his first start of the season among four changes made by Zidane. Promoted Huesca made a bright start, with on-loan Wolves forward Rafa Mir putting an early shot wide and then having an effort disallowed for offside. Goalkeeper Andrés Fernandez did well to keep out a Sergio Ramos header at the other end, before Huesca went forward again as Javier Ontiveros brought a save out of Thibault Courtois and Sergio Gómez sent an attempt off-target. Hazard then fired the hosts ahead with a stunning strike from around 30 yards out in the 40th minute – only his second goal for the club, and first in more than a year. Just five minutes later, Benzema doubled the advantage, chesting down Lucas Vázquez’s cross and thumping the ball home. Victory looked all but secure when Valverde collected the ball from Benzema and struck past Fernandez in the 54th minute, adding to his goal in last weekend’s 3-1 El Clásico win at Barcelona. Ferreiro reduced the deficit with a close-range finish in the 74th minute, before Benzema headed home Real’s fourth in the 90th. His double came a day on from Zidane stressing there was “no problem” between the French striker and teammate Vinicius Junior – who came on for Hazard on the hour – after video footage emerged appearing to show Benzema telling Ferland Mendy not to pass to the Brazil international at half time in Tuesday’s game. • A full round-up of Saturday’s action around Europe will appear here later