Nathaniel Clyne has rejoined Crystal Palace on a short-term deal eight years after he left Selhurst Park. The right-back, who has been training with the club after being released by Liverpool, made 137 appearances between 2008 and 2012. “I’m a London boy, this is where I grew up. I’m back home and all my family and friends are here,” he said. “It’s surreal being back, enjoying it and hopefully I can just crack on and enjoy my football again.” Clyne earned his first England call-up under current Palace manager, Roy Hodgson, and made 14 international appearances. The chairman, Steve Parish, said: “Nathaniel is a fantastic character to have around this squad and we are delighted to secure his services. He is a first-rate professional, just as he was when I first met him more than a decade ago. His presence and experience will be invaluable.” The Newcastle forward Allan Saint-Maximin has signed a new deal to stay at St James’ Park until 2026. The Frenchman was already under a long-term contract, having signed an initial six-year deal when he joined the club in August last year following a £16m transfer from Nice. Saint-Maximin impressed during his debut Premier League season, playing 30 times and scoring four goals. The 23-year-old told the club’s website: “I’ve played for a lot of clubs – Monaco, Nice, in Germany, but Newcastle, I feel like it’s my home. The supporters give me a lot of love, the coach too, and my partners on the pitch. Everybody gives me love and when you have this, I feel it’s my home and I hope this stays my home for a long time. “Every club I’d been before, the fans loved me but not like Newcastle fans. That’s really important, because for me, you have the football and everything, but you have the human and they give me something different. So if I can give back to the supporters and to the club with a new deal, I’m really happy.” Steve Bruce said: “We’re absolutely delighted he’s committed his future here. I’m sure the supporters will be delighted with the news. He’s had an introduction now to what life in the Premier League is like and with Allan, the world is at his feet. He can go as far as he wants to go, because he’s got the talent to do it.”