The chronic uncertainty pervading England’s secondary schools may be just one among many problems that Boris Johnson’s government is failing to deal with. But the urgency of the situation regarding GCSE and A-level exams, due to be taken by more than 1 million teenagers next summer, makes the lack of clarity from ministers inexcusable. Wednesday’s announcement by the Scottish government that National 5s (roughly equivalent to GCSEs) would be replaced by teacher assessment threw the UK government’s inaction into stark relief. Details of an adjusted GCSE timetable from the Welsh and Northern Irish administrations are also awaited. Since schools closed in March, it has been obvious that pupils who were then in the first year of two-year exam courses (years 10 and 12) faced potentially damaging consequences. Yet the education secretary, Gavin Williamson, has still not clarified how next summer’s exams will be changed to take account of learning missed, or what happens if the pandemic stops them from taking place – although an announcement about contingency plans is expected. Clearly, the postponement of exams by three weeks cannot make up for a term (or more) of missed classes. Nor does the funding allocated to “catch-up” tutoring in England provide an answer. What makes the government’s silence all the more deafening is that there is no shortage of suggestions. Given the extent to which the current system is geared towards testing, cancelling exams at this stage could create more problems than it solves. But increased “optionality”, meaning more choice of questions, makes sense. So does a proposal tabled by unions, headteachers and governors to introduce staged assessments, moderated to ensure fairness. Sir Michael Wilshaw has put forward similar arguments and, as a former chief inspector of schools appointed by Michael Gove, he is someone the government might be expected to listen to. Other questions require answers, too. These include the extra demands of the pandemic on school budgets and the government’s plan for Ofsted inspections to resume, given the pressures schools are under. Then there are the issues connected with remote learning, including training, equipment and the likelihood that a rise in the amount of time spent out of school will increase inequalities. Longstanding problems of teacher recruitment and retention are expected to ease in the current economic climate, but risks associated with shortages and burnout have not gone away. There is a strong case, too, for taking another look at the whole system and particularly GCSEs, as some school leaders and Conservative MPs are demanding. Existing arrangements have been exposed by the pandemic as lacking in resilience. Exam stress is widely regarded as contributing to teenagers’ unhappiness. The chaos and controversy surrounding the algorithm used to decide this summer’s grades points to wider concerns around statistical modelling and “norm referencing”, whereby the number of students receiving a grade is fixed without reference to objective standards (so that, for example, the bottom 5% of entries could be graded 1 regardless of their strength except in relation to other entries). Labour MPs should add their voices to those calling for reform. But any sudden upheaval must be resisted. The priority now is helping schools and pupils to recover lost ground and raise their level of preparedness, with a focus on vulnerable groups and individuals. Ministers must lead these efforts. Distractions such as the recent issuing of guidance to schools forbidding the teaching of unspecified “victim narratives” should not be repeated. Such announcements give the impression that, rather than being supporters of schools, ministers see themselves as their antagonists. And perhaps this is the case, at least in part? Mr Gove, who with his adviser, Dominic Cummings, cultivated a bunker mentality when he was education secretary, remains at the heart of government. Nick Gibb, who once described his favourite book (by the American academic ED Hirsch) as an “armoury against the education establishment”, has been a schools minister for 10 years. Such posturing was never constructive. But if, in the midst of a pandemic, with children’s education hanging in the balance, ministers still see themselves as fighting some kind of battle against ideologically suspect teachers, everyone who cares about schools should be worried.