Liverpool have been handed another setback with their influential winger Sadio Mané testing positive for Covid-19. The forward is the second player at Anfield to test positive in a matter of days following Thiago Alcântara’s result which forced Liverpool’s new signing into a period of self-isolation. Mané, who has been in fine form for the Premier League champions, will now miss Sunday’s game at Aston Villa. The club say the 28-year-old has “displayed minor symptoms of the virus but feels in good health overall”. A club statement read: “Sadio Mané has tested positive for Covid-19 and is currently self-isolating according to the necessary guidelines. The forward, who started and scored in Monday’s 3-1 victory over Arsenal, has displayed minor symptoms of the virus but feels in good health overall. “However, like with Thiago Alcântara, Liverpool Football Club are – and will continue to – follow all protocols relating to Covid-19 and Mané will self-isolate for the required period of time.” Mané was not part of Liverpool’s squad on Thursday night, when Jürgen Klopp’s much-changed side went out of the Carabao Cup on penalties to Arsenal in the fourth-round tie. Klopp will hope to have both affected players available when his team return to action after the international break on 17 October for the Merseyside derby at Everton. Mané has been a pivotal part of Liverpool’s impressive league start, scoring both goals in their 2-0 win over Chelsea before also netting against Arsenal. His enforced isolation will also affect his international commitments after Mané was named in Senegal’s squad for their upcoming friendlies against Morocco and Mauritania. The player gave an update via Instagram on Friday night: “I tested positive but I am feeling good and not showing heavy symptoms. I will begin my quarantine and recovery process immediately. Make sure that you stay safe and follow all rules to protect yourself and your loved ones to avoid a second wave of the Covid-19 virus. I will be back stronger than before. We will get through this together.”