The North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, said his country will “fully mobilise” its nuclear force if threatened, during a speech at a military parade. At the event, the country unveiled what appeared to be a new intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) and other additions to its growing weapons arsenal. Kim, however, avoided direct criticism of Washington during the event, which celebrated the 75th anniversary of the country’s ruling party. Instead, he focused on a domestic message urging his people to remain firm in the face of “tremendous challenges” posed by the coronavirus pandemic and crippling US-led sanctions over his nuclear program. Kim described North Korea’s continuing efforts to develop its nuclear deterrent as necessary for its defense and said it was not targeting any specific country with its military force. But he said: “If any force harms the safety of our nation, we will fully mobilise the strongest offensive might in a pre-emptive manner to punish them.” Kim’s speech was punctuated by thousands of goose-stepping troops, tanks, armoured vehicles, rocket launchers and a broad range of ballistic missiles rolled out in Pyongyang’s Kim Il-sung Square. The weapons included what was possibly North Korea’s biggest-yet ICBM, which was mounted on an 11-axle launch vehicle that also appeared to be new. In addition, a variety of solid-fuel weapon systems were on display, including what could be an advanced version of its Pukguksong family of missiles. They are designed to be fired from submarines or land mobile launchers. The missiles highlighted how the country has continued to expand its military capabilities amid a stalemate in nuclear negotiations with the Trump administration. Kim had previously expressed frustration over the slow diplomacy, pledging in December that he would continue to bolster his nuclear arsenal in the face of US pressure and soon unveil a “new strategic weapon to the world”. He said at the time, the country was no longer obligated to maintain a self-imposed suspension on nuclear weapon and ICBM tests, which the US president touted as a significant foreign policy achievement. The probable ICBM paraded on Saturday was clearly the new strategic weapon Kim had promised to show, said Melissa Hanham, deputy director of the Austria-based Open Nuclear Network. North Korea had already demonstrated a potential ability to reach deep into the US mainland with a flight test of its Hwasong-15 ICBM in 2017. Developing a larger missile possibly means the country is trying to arm its long-range weapons with more warheads, she said. “North Korea is pushing ahead with its nuclear strategy regardless of the tough year that it has had with regard to diplomatic talks, flooding from typhoons and Covid-19,” Hanham said. “I also think that this is a message to the US – he has already declared he no longer holds himself to the moratorium and he has something new as well he may wish to test.” The celebratory event, which began late on Friday, was not broadcast by North Korean state television until Saturday evening, when it aired a taped broadcast. Goose-stepping troops were seen marching in the streets in front of a brightly illuminated Kim Il-sung Square, as a military band performed while moving in formation. The performers and tens of thousands of spectators roared as Kim appeared from a building as the clock struck midnight. Kim, flanked with senior officials and smiling widely, waved to the crowd and kissed children who presented him with flowers before taking his spot on a balcony. During his speech, Kim repeatedly thanked his “great people” for overcoming “unexpected” burdens. He also praised their efforts to abide by the anti-virus measures imposed by the ruling party and government to keep the country free of Covid-19, a claim that has been widely questioned by outside observers. He also extended an olive branch to rival South Korea, expressing hope the countries could repair bilateral ties once the threat of the pandemic is over. North Korea had suspended virtually all cooperation with South Korea amid the stalemate in larger nuclear negotiations with the US. After his speech, Kim waved and watched with binoculars as the military hardware was rolled out in the square. He saluted as fighter jets flew in formation above his head, using fireworks to form the Workers’ party’s symbol – a hammer, brush and sickle – and the number 75 in the sky. Earlier on Saturday, masked citizens lined up to lay flowers at the statues of Kim Il-sung and Kim Jong-il, Kim’s father, at Pyongyang’s Mansu Hill. The country’s official Korean Central News Agency (KCNA) said residents in Kaesong and other regions who had lost their homes to recent natural disasters marked the party anniversary by moving into newly built houses and that they praised Kim Jong-un for looking after them as “their father”. KCNA also reported that the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, sent a letter to Kim saying that Beijing would continue to “defend, consolidate and develop” bilateral relations with Pyongyang.