Lately, Lauren Curtis’s work has expanded well beyond the makeup tutorials and reviews that made her one of Australia’s most successful YouTubers. But while she’s happy to leave her Perth home without makeup on these days, and her podcast, Mental Makeover, focuses on what goes on in your head, not on your face, she still knows a good product when she sees it. When we asked her to select the most useful objects in her life right now, she says she “tossed up” many options, but “I wanted to keep it to ones I genuinely use”. I found myself getting really bad headaches, because I’m always slouching. I was getting shoulder and neck pain too. I was talking about this to my mum. I said: “I’m not even 30 yet – surely I’m too young to experience this?” I went to get my eyes checked because of the headaches, and they weren’t the problem. The issue was that I was going to the gym, then slouching all day, and it started adding up. I ignored it and ignored it, but then realised I needed something to take the edge off. So, this is a bit boring, but I got an adjustable laptop stand. Now I never have to look down – you can adjust it to an angle that fixes your posture, but you can type as normal. It’s made such a huge difference on my neck. I wish I’d bought one sooner – they’re awesome. This year I had a bad breakout and I wanted to use something that would help me stop touching my face. I’d been sent some more expensive pimple patches a few years ago – ones that were for deep pimples that never come to a head– and had been sceptical. But when I started using patches that were for surface-level pimples this year, I found they really worked for me. I spoke with my followers about them, and found that many of them really liked them as well – so I got recommendations from them. They work by absorbing some of the bad stuff out of the pimple and into the patch, and then once you remove the patch the next day, the pimple should be reduced. They make me stress less when I get pimples – because they stop me from making it worse. It’s something I’ve been using every week or so, lately. There are so many different styles of patches – little stars, smiley faces – that it makes something bad into something funny, and almost enjoyable. They’re also affordable. The ones I was using are $10 a pack – although they’re sold out everywhere now! I’ll just keep keep trying lots of different kinds, and hopefully they’ll work just as well. I saw Jaclyn Hill (an American beauty influencer) mention these in a video and thought it was genius. I bought one immediately and I haven’t stopped using it since. It’s a microfibre bath towel that wraps around and clips closed. I use it whenever I have a shower, because if I want to do a long skincare routine, I don’t want to get dressed into my clothing to do all of that – but if I’m just wearing my towel, well, it was always coming undone or falling down. These actually keep you in your towel, and it’s super soft. I don’t like having anything touching my shoulders when I get ready, because I find it makes it harder to straighten or blow-dry your hair – it ends up getting getting caught up and kinking. It also means I don’t have to worry about getting foundation on to a fluffy robe – which is really hard to get out. Now I just dry off using my actual towel, and get into this.