Chrissy Teigen has said she and husband John Legend are “shocked” and in “deep pain” after losing their baby during pregnancy.The US model and TV presenter had been taken to hospital because of excessive bleeding. Teigen, 34, later wrote in a statement on social media: “We are shocked and in the kind of deep pain you only hear about, the kind of pain we’ve never felt before.“We were never able to stop the bleeding and give our baby the fluids he needed, despite bags and bags of blood transfusions. It just wasn’t enough,” she wrote on Wednesday night. Teigen shared the news with a black-and-white picture showing her crying while sitting in a hospital bed. pic.twitter.com/iBFKYtYwi2 Teigen, who has two other children with Legend, said the couple had called the baby Jack.“We never decide on our babies’ names until the last possible moment after they’re born, just before we leave the hospital. But we, for some reason, had started to call this little guy in my belly Jack. So he will always be Jack to us. Jack worked so hard to be a part of our little family, and he will be, forever,” she wrote.“To our Jack - I’m so sorry that the first few moments of your life were met with so many complications, that we couldn’t give you the home you needed to survive. We will always love you.”Teigen thanked everyone for their “positive energy, thoughts and prayers” and said her family will now spend time grieving.She said: “We are so grateful for the life we have, for our wonderful babies Luna and Miles, for all the amazing things we’ve been able to experience. But everyday can’t be full of sunshine. On this darkest of days, we will grieve, we will cry our eyes out. But we will hug and love each other harder and get through it.”Legend, a multi-award winning singer, shared his wife’s tweet and wrote: “We love you, Jack.” Teigen later tweeted: “Driving home from the hospital with no baby. How can this be real.” Driving home from the hospital with no baby. How can this be real. The announcement sparked an outpouring of support for the couple, with several people thanking them for being so open about their grief. So many families suffer this kind of grief in silence. My heart breaks for these two, and I’m also in awe of their strength and their insistence on telling these tragic but all to common stories. https://t.co/WZXGGmrtAo The couple announced they were expecting a third child in August.Teigen and Legend, 41, have spoken publicly about their fertility issues and said their third child was the first conceived without IVF.