If ever the importance of having a good character was put to the vote, it was in November 2016. Then, a reality TV star who flaunted his bad character (from mocking a disabled reporter, to bragging about grabbing women by the pussy and disrespecting members of the military) was voted president of the United States, and on some level the issue was settled. Does character matter anymore? Increasingly, it seems no. Donald Trump even snatched the conservative and evangelical Christian vote – a cohort who had claimed in the past to be committed to the “centrality of character in leadership” – and who had ostensibly rejected Bill Clinton’s candidacy on moral grounds. Character – loosely defined as having moral and ethical qualities that guide your actions towards the greater good – is frequently eclipsed in the political sphere by charisma. What Trump lacks in character he makes up for in an abundance of charisma – and this was enough to get him over the line in 2016. With his weirdly soporific voice and orange face, Trump is in turn mesmerising, entertaining, appalling and shocking. You can’t look away. Likewise the prime minister of the United Kingdom, Boris Johnson. As entertaining and watchable as he is (look at him dangling from a zip-line!), his entire career, starting with early days as a journalist, has displayed behaviour revealing poor character, from allegedly making up quotes to lying about Brexit. “Lots of people are just awed by his charisma,” Nicholas Allen, who teaches politics at Royal Holloway, University of London, told NPR just prior to Johnson’s re-election. “They know that he is problematic. They know that he’s a flawed character and they do not care. If anything, they love him more for it.” He’s flawed – and they don’t care. If the Stoics could see life in 2020, they’d be baffled and depressed The corrosion of character in public life is part of a larger trend. These days the place you’re most likely to hear a deep assessment of someone’s character is when you’re at their funeral. In a pluralistic society, the idea of imposing an ideal character checklist on a range of people from a variety of backgrounds feels fraught. But despite societal shifts around personal morality, there are values that have existed since ancient times which are still relevant today. For the Stoic philosophers of ancient Greece and Rome, nothing was more important than your character – not even your own life. According to the Stoics, character was one of the only things you could control in life (a life that was often harsh and unpredictable), therefore you had a duty to create and maintain the best character you possibly could. A good character was one that cultivated courage, self-control, wisdom and justice. Nothing else mattered as much as this. What’s more, it excluded no one. Anyone could develop a good character, it was part of human nature, and with practise and commitment, it could flourish in each person. For the ancients, having a good character not only made your own life easier (you could absorb the blows of fortune a bit easier with wisdom and courage), but it made life better for those around you. With self-control you were less likely to fly into a rage and upset others. With justice, you were committed to fair and equitable outcomes, not only for yourself but those around you. If the Stoics could see life in 2020, they’d be baffled and depressed. Now western society has devolved to the extent that not only saying in a presidential debate “will you shut up, man” is celebrated as a prized piece of rhetoric, but the whole notion of character is increasingly devalued in public life. Instead we have been rewarding different types of virtue: success, status, fame, admiration and good looks. In other words – the stuff of charisma, not character. It’s my hope that the ghastliness and profound emptiness of this current political and cultural moment spurs a revival of the importance of character. In the recent deaths of Ruth Bader Ginsburg and actor Chadwick Boseman, they were remembered not only for their substantial professional achievements but also for their actions. Story after story emerged about how well they conducted themselves and how kindly they treated others. In other words, they were remembered for their character. As the US faces another election, Trump is again showing us who he is. He is a man devoid of character – a mogul who paid less tax in 2017 than a school teacher, who is reported to have belittled the American war dead as “losers”, and who holds big indoor rallies filled with maskless older voters during a deadly pandemic. Maybe we, the citizens, need to take the lead in displaying good character He is not leading by Roman statesman’s Cicero’s maxim: “The safety of the people shall be the highest law.” Maybe we, the citizens, need to take the lead in displaying good character. We may not frame it this way, but in 2020, all of us, every day, are called on to display classical concepts of character. The virtue of justice requires us to undertake a serious examination of systemic racism, particularly in policing and justice systems. Self-control requires not going out when it’s unsafe to do so, or not breaking health orders that may result in the spread of the coronavirus. Wisdom is accepting science and the need to adapt to a global pandemic when we are yet to develop a vaccine. And courage: to face the scary present and the unknown future. Brigid Delaney is co-writing (with Andrew Charlton) a book on Stoicism to be published by Allen and Unwin in 2021 