Alex Salmond is said to be “astonished” at Nicola Sturgeon’s claims that he is angry with her because she would not collude in covering up sexual harassment allegations made against him, as the ongoing conflict between Scotland’s former and current first ministers escalated into open feuding. Salmond made his first public comment on the inquiry into the Scottish government’s botched handling of the complaints against him, stating that “the first time I will comment is in front of the parliamentary committee”. “This committee was established to inquire into the conduct of the first minister, her special advisers and civil servants after her government’s behaviour was found to be ‘unlawful’, ‘unfair’ and ‘tainted by apparent bias’ and at enormous cost to the public purse.” A source close to Salmond said he was not angry, “just astonished at the ever-shifting sands of [Sturgeon’s] story”. The source went on: “Her claims of an attempted ‘collusion’ are not only untrue but unsupported by the written evidence and directly contradicted by her own previous parliamentary statements. She claims to have ‘nothing to hide’. That is not the impression she is giving.” The response comes after a week in which Sturgeon’s evidence to the committee was published, where she denied “in the strongest possible terms” conspiring against or colluding with Salmond over sexual harassment allegations, as her husband and Scottish National party chief executive, Peter Murrell, admitted sending leaked text messages that appeared to endorse “pressuring” the police to investigate the former first minister. At first minister’s questions on Thursday, Sturgeon had a bruising encounter with the Scottish Tories’ Holyrood leader, Ruth Davidson, who said it was “beyond belief” that she had forgotten, as her evidence states, a key meeting where allegations of sexual misconduct against Salmond were discussed. Sturgeon responded: “I understand why it may some suit some people to say this is all some great conspiracy. And during an interview with Sophy Ridge on Sky on Sunday, Sturgeon suggested: “I think the reason perhaps he [Mr Salmond] is angry with me – and he clearly is angry with me – is that I didn’t cover it up, I didn’t collude with him to make these allegations go away, and perhaps that is at the root of why he is as annoyed as he appears to be.” She told Ridge much of the criticism she had endured was “age-old”, “that a man is accused of misconduct against women and often it’s a woman that ends up sitting answering for them”, adding that the allegations could not be “brushed under the carpet”.