Real Madrid scored two goals in the final minutes with Karim Benzema and Casemiro to rescue a 2-2 draw at Borussia Mönchengladbach in their Champions League Group B match to avoid a fourth successive defeat in the competition. Marcus Thuram fired in for the lead in the 33rd minute and tapped in on the rebound in the 58th before Benzema cut the deficit in the 87th minute and Casemiro bagged a stoppage-time equaliser. The 13-time European champions, who had lost their previous three games including a 3-2 defeat by Shakhtar Donetsk last week, earned their first point in the competition. “We didn’t think this would be such a drama,” the Real coach Zinedine Zidane said. “But my team showed that they know how to react. We always play to win and show the hunger to win. No way were we happy with the draw.” Gladbach, who also conceded a 90th-minute equaliser in their 2-2 draw at Internazionale last week, are second in the group on two points, with Shakhtar top on four after a 0-0 draw with Inter. Inter, who beat Shakhtar 5-0 in last season’s Europa League semi-final, missed a host of chances and twice hit the crossbar in the opening half, with Romelu Lukaku seeing his thundering free-kick tipped on to the woodwork by Anatoliy Trubin. Bayern Munich’s Joshua Kimmich volleyed in a 79th-minute winner on Tuesday as they battled past hosts Lokomotiv Moscow 2-1 in their Group A match to extend their winning run in the competition to 13 consecutive games. Leon Goretzka headed them in front in the 13th minute but they squandered a string of chances to double their lead and also hit the post before Anton Miranchuk punished their wastefulness following a quick break from Zé Luís. João Félix bagged two goals for Atlético Madrid as they survived a scare to complete a 3-2 victory against RB Salzburg. Marcos Llorente put Atlético ahead in the first half, but goals from Dominik Szoboszlai and Mergim Berisha swung the fixture in the favour of the visitors early in the second half. But the excellent Félix regained the initiative for his side with an equaliser, before firing in the winner with five minutes to play. The striker Duván Zapata scored twice in six minutes to drag Atalanta back from a two-goal deficit and ensure a 2-2 draw with Ajax. The Colombian international’s double came after defensive lapses had allowed the Dutch side to go 2-0 up at the interval with the captain, Dusan Tadic, scoring a penalty and the teenager Lassina Traoré adding a second eight minutes later. Fábio Vieira scored an early goal for Porto as they beat Olympiakos 2-0. Lazar Randjelovic wasted a golden chance for the Greek side when he shot tamely at the keeper with the goal at his mercy. Sérgio Oliveira made the points safe with a second goal for Porto five minutes from time as he converted Moussa Marega’s cross.