Bars in the Paris region have been ordered to close from Tuesday after health authorities reported a sharp rise in the number of Covid-19 infections among the 20-30 age group. Restaurants in and around the French capital have been given a reprieve and told they can stay open on condition that they enforce new, stricter health safety regulations. This will involve taking the name and telephone number of diners, allowing a maximum of six people per group and providing hand gel on each table. The city’s police chief said this applied only to establishments “whose main activity is serving food”. Cinemas, theatres and museums will continue to open but sports and fitness clubs will remain closed. Swimming pools and sports halls will be closed to adults but not to minors. The Paris police prefect, Didier Lallement, told a press conference: “This morning we enter a new phase. We are adapting all the time to the development of the virus. These measures are aimed at slowing the spread of the virus because it is spreading too quickly.” Lallement said the measures he had decided upon were a fine “balance between the preservation of the health of our compatriots and the continuation of economic and social life”. The measures came hours after the government announced the Paris region was being declared an area of “maximum alert” after worsening Covid-19 infection rates. Aurélien Rousseau, the director of the regional health service, said the number of cases of coronavirus in the Île-de-France area had risen to 270 per 100,000 population, but the most worrying element was a rise to more than 500 per 100,000 population among the 20-30 age group. Rousseau said 35% of intensive care hospital beds in the Paris region were being occupied by coronavirus patients and this was expected to rise to 50%. The following restrictions are on place for 15 days from Tuesday: • A ban on events of more than 1,000 people not including staff and security.• A ban on gatherings of more than 10 people in exterior public places.• A ban on the sale and consumption of alcohol after 10pm.• A ban on music in public places after 10pm.• No student parties or family gatherings allowed in public halls and reception areas.• University lecture halls, theatres, refectories, and libraries to reduce the number of students at any one time by 50%.• No visits to care, nursing or retirement homes without an appointment, two people maximum.• Major shopping and commercial centres to limit the number of people to one customer per 4 sq metres of floor space. Markets remain open and demonstrations, funerals and marriages at town halls and churches will be allowed. Public transport will continue as now. On Sunday, the office of the French prime minister, Jean Castex, said there had been no improvement in the Paris region since the French capital passed all three of the government’s criteria for being put on the highest level of alert last week. The move comes as Europe’s second wave gathers pace, with Ireland’s health officials reportedly about to recommend a return to full lockdown and leaked documents showing plans for a stricter traffic-light system in England. A statement from Castex’s office said working from home should be prioritised “now more than ever” in the Paris area and university lecture halls should be no more than half full.