The Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny says he believes Vladimir Putin ordered intelligence agencies to poison him, possibly to avoid a “Belarusian scenario” of civil unrest. Navalny, who is recovering in Germany after falling ill on a flight from Tomsk to Moscow in August, told the news magazine Der Spiegel that the use of the rare nerve agent novichok meant the assault on his life would have been ordered from the top. “I assert that Putin was behind the crime, and I have no other explanation for what happened”, Navalny said in his first interview since the poisoning. “Only three people can give orders to put into action ‘active measures’ and use novichok. Those who know Russian states of affairs also know: FSB director Alexander Bortnikov, foreign intelligence service head Sergey Naryshkin and the director of GRU cannot make such a decision without Putin’s orders.” The Kremlin has repeatedly denied any involvement. Vyacheslav Volodin, the speaker of the Russian Duma, responded to Navalny’s accusations against Putin by calling the opposition leader a “shameless scoundrel”. “Putin saved his life. If what happened to him was a specially directed operation by western security services then this accusation fits with the logic. He was saved by everyone, from the pilots and doctors to the president,” Volodin said. Russian officials have variously suggested that Navalny was not poisoned at all, that he poisoned himself, or that western spy agencies poisoned him. Novichok refers to a group of nerve agents developed by the Soviet Union in the 1970s and 80s to elude international restrictions on chemical weapons. Like other nerve agents, they are organophosphate compounds, but the chemicals used to make them, and their final structures, are considered classified in the UK, the US and other countries. The most potent of the novichok substances are considered to be more lethal than VX, the most deadly of the familiar nerve agents, which include sarin, tabun and soman. Novichok agents work in a similar way, by massively over-stimulating muscles and glands. Treatment for novichok exposure would be the same as for other nerve agents, namely with atropine, diazepam and potentially drugs called oximes. The chemical structures of novichok agents were made public in 2008 by Vil Mirzayanov, a former Russian scientist living in the US, but the structures have never been publicly confirmed. It is thought they can be made in different forms, including as a dust aerosol. The novichoks are known as binary agents because they only become lethal  after mixing two otherwise harmless components. According to Mirzayanov, they are 10 to 100 times more toxic than conventional nerve agents. Navalny, when asked why Putin would have resorted to methods of chemical warfare – which in the past had been reserved for acts of retribution against former intelligence officials – pointed to the protests against President Alexander Lukashenko in Belarus, as well to anti-Kremlin protests in the Siberian city of Khabarovsk. “The Kremlin notices that it needs to take extreme measures to avoid a ‘Belarusian scenario’,” he told Der Spiegel. “The system is fighting for survival, and we have just started to feel the consequences.” The plane on which Navalny fell ill on 20 August made an emergency landing in Omsk, where he spent two days in a coma before being flown by a medical jet to Berlin. Asked why Putin would have allowed him to leave the country if he were behind the attack, Navalny said he had been saved by his situation becoming a “reality show” that was watched around the world. “I believe they were determined not to let me leave the country, and that is why they publicly declared I was not in a fit state to be transported,” Navalny said. “They were waiting for me to die. But because of support for me and the efforts of my wife, the whole thing turned into a kind of reality show, with the title ‘Navalny dies in Omsk’ . “For Putin’s people it is important that they don’t lend their enemies a victim status. If I had died in Omsk or left with permanent damage there, then the responsibility would have clearly been with them.” The founding leader of the Russia of the Future party said he believed he was poisoned via a contaminated surface in his room at the hotel Xander in Tomsk, possibly because intelligence agencies had learned lessons from the failed 2018 poisoning of Sergei Skripal in Salisbury. “I believe that they drew conclusion from the … [Salisbury] case, when 48 people were contaminated and an uninvolved woman died. That is why the poison was probably not applied to an object that I may not even use, like the sink or the shower. Or my mobile phone, which I might have handed to [his spokesperson] Kira [Yarmish]. I am only speculating. It appears that we are dealing with a sophisticated substance, and it was applied to an object only I would touch.” Describing the moment in the aeroplane when the poison started to take effect, Navalny said: “You feel no pain, but you know you’re dying. And I mean right now. Even though nothing hurts you … you just think: this is the end.” While Der Spiegel reported that Navalny had lost 12kg (26lb) in weight, the Russian activist said his health was improving steadily and doctors had told him he might recover “90, maybe even 100%”. “Basically, I’m a bit of a guinea pig,” he said. “There aren’t many people you can observe who are still alive after being poisoned with a nerve agent.” In one of the most chilling episodes of the cold war, the Bulgarian dissident was poisoned with a specially adapted umbrella on Waterloo Bridge. As he waited for a bus, Markov felt a sharp prick in his leg. The opposition activist, who was an irritant to the communist government of Bulgaria, died three days later. A deadly pellet containing ricin was found in his skin. His unknown assassin is thought to have been from the secret services in Bulgaria. The fatal poisoning of the former FSB officer sparked an international incident. Litvinenko fell ill after drinking tea laced with radioactive polonium. He met his killers in a bar of the Millennium hotel in Mayfair. The pair were Andrei Lugovoi – a former KGB officer turned businessman, who is now a deputy in Russia’s state Duma – and Dmitry Kovtun, a childhood friend of Lugovoi’s from a Soviet military family. Putin denied all involvement and refused to extradite either of the killers. The exiled Russian banker survived an attempt on his life as he got out of a cab in east London. He was shot four times with a silenced pistol. He had been involved in a bitter dispute with two former business partners. The businessman collapsed while running near his home in Surrey. Traces of a chemical that can be found in the poisonous plant gelsemium were later found in his stomach. Before his death, Perepilichnyy was helping a specialist investment firm uncover a $230m Russian money-laundering operation, a pre-inquest hearing was told. Hermitage Capital Management claimed that Perepilichnyy could have been deliberately killed for helping it uncover the scam involving Russian officials. He may have eaten a popular Russian dish containing the herb sorrel on the day of his death, which could have been poisoned. The exiled billionaire was found hanged in an apparent suicide after he had spent more than decade waging a high-profile media battle against his one-time protege Putin. A coroner recorded an open verdict after hearing conflicting expert evidence about the way he died. A pathologist who conducted a postmortem examination on the businessman’s body said he could not rule out murder. An associate of Berezovsky whom he helped to launder money, he was found impaled on railings after he fell from a fourth-floor flat in central London. A coroner ruled that there was insufficient evidence of suicide. But Young, who was sent to prison in January 2013 for repeatedly refusing to reveal his finances during a divorce row, told his partner he was going to jump out of the window moments before he was found. Sergei Skripal and his daughter Yulia were were found unconscious on a bench in the Maltings shopping centre in Salisbury after 'suspected exposure to an unknown substance' which was later identified as chemical weapon novichok. In the aftermath Theresa May blamed Vladimir Putin and expelled 23 Russian diplomats who were suspected of spying. Two Russian men using the identities Ruslan Boshirov and Alexander Petrov were named as suspects. They appeared on Russian TV to protest their innocence. The Skripals survived. However a local woman, Dawn Sturgess, died after spraying novichok on her wrists from a fake Nina Ricci perfume bottle converted into a dispenser, which had been recovered from a skip by her partner Charlie Rowley. Navalny remains at the Charité hospital in Berlin, where he confirmed that the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, had visited him. “I was impressed by how well she knows Russia and my case. Some details she knows better than me.” Merkel has condemned the poisoning more strongly than many people expected, but governments across the EU have struggled to find an effective way of extracting answers from the Kremlin over the case. Navalny declined to endorse stopping the Nord Stream 2 Russian gas pipeline project as a retaliation: “That’s Germany’s business”, he said. “Decide for yourself.” He said sanctions against Russia were ineffective. “What we need are fine against specific culprits, and I tell you: 95% of Russian citizens would welcome this.” Despite the attempt on his life, he wants to return to Russia. “My job now is to remain the guy who isn’t afraid. And I’m not afraid. When my hands shake, it’s not from fear, it’s from this stuff. I would not give Putin the gift of not returning to Russia.”