The EU has been given permission to levy tariffs on US products worth $4bn in retaliation for subsidies given to Boeing, in the latest salvo in a bitter 16-year battle between the US plane maker and its European arch rival, Airbus. The ruling by the World Trade Organization (WTO), delayed by the coronavirus pandemic, could increase trade tensions shortly before the US presidential election on 3 November, although it could also set the stage for tariff negotiations between the EU and the US, which has already imposed levies on European goods in parallel action against Airbus. Valdis Dombrovskis, the European commission vice-president in charge of trade, said: “Our strong preference is for a negotiated settlement. Otherwise, we will be forced to defend our interests and respond in a proportionate way.” The WTO had ruled in April 2019 that the US subsidies to Boeing were illegal, but had not said how big the gains were. However, between 2006 and 2040 Boeing was expected to benefit from $6bn in tax breaks, the WTO said. Airbus – 1,700 jobs30 June: The European planemaker announced plans to cut 15,000 jobs, including 1,700 in the UK, as it warned the coronavirus pandemic had triggered the “gravest crisis” in its history. Swissport – 4,500 jobs24 June: Swissport, which handles passenger baggage and cargo for airlines, has begun a consultation process to make 4,556 workers redundant, more than half of its 8,500 UK workforce. Bombardier – 600 jobs11 June: The Canadian planemaker will cut 600 jobs in Northern Ireland, as part of 2,500 redundancies announced in June. Rolls-Royce – 9,000 jobs3 June: The jet-engine manufacturer has confirmed that 3,000 job cuts, of a planned 9,000 worldwide, will be made in sites in the UK. easyJet – 4,500 jobs28 May: The airline has announced plans to cut 4,500 employees, or 30% of its workforce, as it prepared for lower demand. Tui – 8,000 jobs13 May: Travel company Tui plans to cut up to 8,000 jobs worldwide in response to the coronavirus chaos engulfing the tourism industry. Virgin Atlantic – 3,000 jobs5 May: Richard Branson’s airline is to cut more than 3,000 jobs, more than a third of its workforce, and will shut its operations at Gatwick. Ryanair – 3,000 jobs1 May: The Irish airline intends to slash 3,000 roles and reduce staff pay by up to a fifth. Aer Lingus – 900 jobs1 May: The Irish flag carrier, part of International Airlines Group (IAG), plans to cut 900 jobs. British Airways – 12,000 jobs28 April: The UK flag carrier plans to make up to 12,000 of its staff redundant, a reduction of one in four jobs at the airline, with cabin crew, pilots and ground staff affected. Meggitt – 1,800 jobs23 April: British engineering company Meggitt plans to shed about 1,800 jobs making parts for commercial aviation. Safran – 400 jobs23 April: French aircraft seat maker Safran made 400 job cuts at its UK operations, including a plant in Cwmbran. Flybe – 400 jobs5 March: Flybe, Europe’s largest regional airline, collapsed into administration with the loss of more than 2,000 jobs, less than two months after a government bailout. Airbus and Boeing have been locked in the tit-for-tat trade dispute since 2004, when the US aerospace champion accused its European rival of receiving illegal launch aid from multiple governments for the development of the A350 twin-aisle plane and its larger cousin, the A380 superjumbo. Boeing, meanwhile, received tax breaks from the state of Washington. The WTO has ruled that the subsidies to both Airbus and Boeing were illegal, but the drawn-out dispute has outlasted several chief executives for both companies, and one of the planes in question, the A380, has since ceased production. In October 2019, the US imposed tariffs worth $7.5bn on EU products including scotch whisky and French wine and cheese in retaliation for the EU subsidies to Airbus. The Scotch Whisky Association this month said that the 25% tariff on its exports had contributed to a 32% decline in exports to the US over the year, costing the industry £360m. The EU last year said it would consider targeting US exports ranging from motorcycle parts to video games consoles to fish and wine, as well as aeroplanes. Extra tariffs could add to financial pressures on Boeing at a time when it is struggling with the unprecedented disruption from the Covid-19 pandemic. Boeing is also trying to regain regulatory authorisation for its previously bestselling 737 Max, which has been grounded for 19 months after two fatal crashes. Both sides have moved to withdraw some of the subsidies. Washington state has repealed some of the tax breaks, while Airbus in July said it would gradually pay back launch support from the French and Spanish governments in an attempt to end the dispute. However, resolution and the removal of tariffs could be delayed by the US presidential election if a new Democratic administration comes in under Joe Biden, the frontrunner in polls. US trade representative Robert Lighthizer said: “Because Washington state repealed that tax break earlier this year, the EU has no valid basis to retaliate against any US products. Any imposition of tariffs based on a measure that has been eliminated is plainly contrary to WTO principles and will force a US response.” A Boeing spokesman said the WTO ruling on Tuesday was “effectively irrelevant” because Washington state had already repealed the tax breaks. The spokesman said that “EU tariffs would not be permissible under WTO law”. “We are disappointed that Airbus and the EU continue to seek to impose tariffs on US companies and their workers based on a tax provision that has been fully and verifiably repealed,” the spokesman said. “Rather than escalating this matter with threats to US businesses and their European customers, Airbus and the EU should be focusing their energies on good-faith efforts to resolve this long-running dispute.“ Guillaume Faury, Airbus’s chief executive, said: “Airbus did not start this WTO dispute, and we do not wish to continue the harm to the customers and suppliers of the aviation industry and to all other sectors impacted. “As we have already demonstrated, we remain prepared and ready to support a negotiation process that leads to a fair settlement.”