Donald Trump announced he had tested positive for Covid-19 on Friday, shortly after reports emerged that his close aide Hope Hicks had contracted the illness. Since then, several member of the president’s inner circle have tested positive. It is not known where Trump contracted the virus. After being exposed, it can take several days for the virus to be detected by a test. People in his circle who have tested positive this week were with the president at a White House ceremony for Judge Amy Coney Barrett on 26 September, preparation sessions for the debate and on Air Force One. There has been no information on whether White House support staff, such as cleaners and chefs, have tested positive. At least three reporters who cover the White House tested positive on Friday. The first lady has remained at the White House and is said to have “mild symptoms”. She was one of seven people to test positive for coronavirus after attending the Coney Barrett ceremony. There was also a smaller group of guests at a reception inside the White House. Bloomberg News first reported on Thursday that the White House aide tested positive for the virus. Trump’s positive test results were publicized the next day. Trump’s former counselor attended last Saturday’s Rose Garden event. The former New Jersey governor said he checked himself into the hospital on Saturday after experiencing mild symptoms and testing positive. Christie said his hospital admission was also a precautionary measure because he has asthma. The assistant acts as one of Trump’s “body men” and works in close proximity with Trump to address his daily needs. His positive test was first reported by Bloomberg. The Republican attended the Rose Garden event and was not wearing a mask. He attended an in-person Senate Republican lunch on Wednesday. The Republican was also at the Rose Garden event, where he wore a mask, and at the Senate lunch on Wednesday. The Republican was recently in a 14-day quarantine under the belief he had been exposed to the virus. He tested negative after it ended, however, and had attended a Senate Republican lunch this week. The RNC said McDaniel tested positive on Wednesday and had been at her home in Michigan since 26 September. The campaign manager tested positive on Friday and has “mild flu-like” symptoms. Stepien traveled to Cleveland for the debate last week on Air Force One with the president and Hicks.