Dr Anthony Fauci, the top US infectious diseases expert and sidelined White House coronavirus taskforce member, has said he was “absolutely not” surprised that Donald Trump contracted coronavirus, as Joe Biden warned that the coronavirus outbreak was worsening. In an interview with 60 Minutes aired on Sunday, shortly before Trump held a rally in Nevada, Fauci said: “I was worried that he was going to get sick when I saw him in a completely precarious situation of crowded, no separation between people, and almost nobody wearing a mask.” Dr. Fauci says he was “absolutely not” surprised that President Trump got sick with coronavirus after seeing POTUS at what “turned out to be a super-spreader event” at the White House. https://t.co/Iq75GoCErk pic.twitter.com/iDWEaoX582 Fauci also said the White House had been controlling his media appearances. “I certainly have not been allowed to go on many, many, many shows that have asked for me,” Fauci said, adding that the restrictions had been inconsistent. At Trump’s rally, the president claimed that the US was “rounding the turn” of the pandemic, a common claim at his appearances, despite the weekly case average rising in 48 of the country’s 50 states. Friday saw the highest 24-hour infection total since July, with 68,000 new cases reported in one day. The US has 8.1m cases and nearly 220,000 deaths. Once considered a battleground, Nevada has not swung for a Republican presidential contender since 2004. Trump also mocked his Democratic opponent for listening to scientists. “If I’d listen to the scientists we would right now have a country that would be in a massive depression instead of – we’re like a rocket ship, look at the numbers,” said Trump. Biden meanwhile, campaigned in North Carolina on Sunday, another key state. At a drive-in rally in Durham, he responded to Trump’s repeated claims that the US had turned a corner in the pandemic: “As my grandfather would say, this guy’s gone around the bend if he thinks we’ve turned the corner. Turning the corner? Things are getting worse,” Biden said. In China, the economy grew by 4.9% on-year in the third quarter, sustaining its rebound the worst of the pandemic, official figures showed on Monday. The figure was slightly below expectations in the July-September period, National Bureau of Statistics data showed, while cautioning of uncertainty ahead as “the international environment is still complicated”. The country’s recovery has so far put it on track to be the only major economy expanding this year, according to International Monetary Fund forecasts, while nations around the world continue to struggle with lockdowns and new waves of infections. On Monday Beijing reported 13 new coronavirus cases, the same as a day earlier. Europe’s death toll has passed 250,000, according to an AFP tally based on official sources. It came as Italy’s mayors were given new coronavirus powers amid a record case rise. Among the powers is the ability to impose 9pm curfews in their towns and cities. Italy reported a record figure of 11,705 new coronavirus cases over the past 24 hours, the health ministry has said, up from the previous peak of 10,925 posted on Saturday. “The situation is critical. The government is there but everyone must do their part,” Italian Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte said. He said the government would consider closing gyms and swimming pools after further checks on security protocols this week. Other global developments in the coronavirus pandemic include: Global coronavirus infections are nearing a staggering 40m cases, with 39.8m currently confirmed on the Johns Hopkins University tracker. Restrictions have eased in the Australian city of Melbourne, which has been under a strict lockdown for more than 100 days. On Monday, hairdressers, dog grooming businesses and real estate inspections reopened. South Africa’s health minister tested positive for coronavirus. Zweli Mkhize announced that he and his wife had tested positive and were quarantining at home. South Africa reported 1,928 new cases on Saturday, pushing the total to just over 700,000 and 18,408 deaths. Slovenia’s prime minister has said on Twitter that a 30-day epidemic would be declared on Monday, with stricter measures to be imposed nationally.