Both countries got a point from this Nations League meeting but in most other senses it was pointless, which is not to say it will be without consequences. The wisdom of persisting with international competition in the midst of a pandemic was cast into further doubt by a raft of Irish withdrawals before the game and the barren spectacle that followed. Ireland were the brighter team in a dull contest but the fact this ended with the hosts being reduced to 10 men because of a red card for James McClean compounded a frustrating week for Stephen Kenny. The Irish manager’s preparations had been disrupted by the news on Saturday night that one of his players, whom the Football Association of Ireland, did not publicly identify, tested positive for Covid-19 and four “close contacts” – John Egan, Callum Robinson, Callum O’Dowda and Alan Browne – had to go into isolation. That took the number of Irish players missing for related reasons to seven, with Aaron Connolly and Adam Idah also absent owing to their proximity to an FAI staff member who tested positive in the week, though it has since transpired the result of that test was inaccurate. So Ireland were in rag order as they sought to rouse themselves four days after their shootout defeat in Slovakia. Wales were in relatively good fettle, with Aaron Ramsey available again after a spell in quarantine, and Kieffer Moore back after a toe injury. The striker made an unintentionally heavy impact in the 23rd minute when he caught Kevin Long with his forearm while jumping for the ball. The challenge depleted Ireland further, forcing the centre-back to leave the action with a swollen eye. That unfortunate moment contrasted with most of what preceded it in a grimly low-fi clash. For long periods the sides cancelled each other out. But after 27 minutes Wales had a shot. The opening was well worked, too, with Harry Wilson swapping cute passes with Ramsey before curling the ball towards the bottom right-hand corner from inside the D. Darren Randolph pushed it around a post. The goalkeeper did not look so sharp a few minutes later when he dropped a cross and collided with Ethan Ampadu while trying to retrieve the ball. The referee decided the Welsh player was in the wrong, to the annoyance of Ryan Giggs. The Wales manager was angered further when a sloppy pass by Wilson gifted the ball to Robbie Brady, who scurried towards the visitors’ box and tried to guide a shot into the top corner, missing by inches. Ireland raised their game in the second half and passed with the inventive intent that Kenny encourages. But their finishing problems are far from solved. McClean did well down the left before laying the ball back to Enda Stevens, whose cross invited the hitherto neglected Shane Long to head into the net from 10 yards. He headed over the bar. Joe Rodon blocked a header by Daryl Horgan in the 78th minute before Horgan rammed the rebound over. The contest concluded with another Irish exclusion, as McClean collected a second yellow card for a late tackle on Ampadu. “It was a bit scrappy,” Giggs said. “We didn’t really get into our rhythm but I think you have to give credit to Ireland for that, they pressed us. But we need to create more.”