For decades novelists have mined the rich dramatic potential of pioneering black-and-white relationships, scarred by the collective memory of slavery, which normalised the subjugation of black women by white men. This brutal history lies just beneath the surface of Reproduction, Ian Williams’s captivating novel, which won last year’s Giller prize in Canada. At its heart is the unlikely affair between Felicia, a teenage Caribbean migrant, and Edgar, a wealthy, chainsmoking thirtysomething with German ancestry; the pair meet inauspiciously on a hospital ward in 1970s Toronto while attending to their gravely sick mothers. Felicia’s anxiety is a reflection of her family’s precariousness; her siblings’ visa applications will most likely be rejected if their mother fails to recover. Felicia, bereft and short of funds, persuades Edgar to let her mother be buried in the plot of land behind his home. Edgar’s role as dutiful son is more grudging; his Mutter’s drawn-out survival is an inconvenience, made less so on her discharge from hospital when Edgar convinces Felicia to work part-time as her carer. More than 30 years after their first encounter, they are reunited on hospital wards Williams ably captures the way Felicia is both innocent and mature beyond her years, as well as Edgar’s emotional immaturity. In his early, clumsy attempt at seduction, “Edgar was no more man than she was woman.” Felicia’s sofa talk includes reminiscences of shocking violence back on her “unrecognised island”, where schoolgirls are beheaded and an uncle is necklaced with a rubber tyre and set on fire; these memories, worn “around her like armour”, dampen Edgar’s ardour and puncture his fumbled attempts at intimacy. The eventual consummation of their affair is comical but also distancing. Despite Edgar “ascending the mysterious and simple heights of male pleasure”, all Felicia can feel during the physical act of sex is “a low hum, the vibration of an automobile in park”. It transpires that Edgar, whose insecurity is evident in his habit of trying to leave a room three times before finally exiting, is more duplicitous than naive. He fails to inform Felicia of his marriage; and, most egregiously, having assured her that he’d had a vasectomy, later confesses he’d only thought of undergoing sterilisation. During the pregnancy that follows, Felicia leaves; Edgar makes little attempt to stop her. Some people shouldn’t reproduce: this one-line synopsis of Reproduction is a familiar story, but the consequences of procreation between unsuited partners – a lifetime of misery and the likelihood of subsequent generations repeating the same mistakes – are explored with subtlety and wit over the novel’s four decades. After the jump-cut that follows Edgar’s callousness (it was inconceivable that he’d “end up with a black woman [who] couldn’t even conjugate an English verb properly”), Reproduction offers an affecting portrayal of the challenges faced by Felicia, now a single mother, and Armistice (Army), her disturbed teenage son, who hides behind a “torrent of words” to disguise his feelings about being abandoned by his father. As the story progresses, Felicia’s emotional intelligence evolves, especially when tested by her lecherous landlord Oliver. There’s a fluidity and zest to Williams’s insightful writing, underpinned by numerous experiments with form and style: a flow-chart illustrating a character’s thought process; absent-minded asides embedded in a smaller font within sentences; and short paragraphs, sometimes just a couple of lines, that read as distilled prose poems. On the missed opportunity for reconciliation when Felicia visits with the baby but Edgar is absent, she recalls: “I bounced Army on your unshovelled porch and stared at the door.” Williams has a penchant for juggling multiple perspectives, most deftly achieved during the unfolding drama of Heather, Oliver’s pregnant 16-year-old daughter. On the eve of her giving birth, the narrative ping-pongs between the vexatious characters – the tetchy teenager; her bemused, finger-pointing mother; Army insisting, much to Felicia’s irritation, on acting as a surrogate father to the unborn child – in a series of short, explosive passages. Reproduction comes full circle when, more than 30 years after their first encounter, the protagonists are reunited on hospital wards, in character as it were: Felicia quietly “modelling a good death”, while Edgar drifts towards his end like a tourist on a Caribbean island, floating, drink in hand, at “the edge of an infinity pool”. Their child is now tasked with keeping vigil for them, giving a poignant symmetry to this finely balanced novel.• Reproduction by Ian Williams is published by Dialogue (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery fees may apply.