The British & Irish Lions have lined up a money-spinning Test against Japan next summer at Murrayfield before heading to South Africa to face the world champions. Warren Gatland’s side will warm up on 26 June before departing for their series against the Springboks – in what will be only the third match on home soil in the Lions’ history – but will do so without Premiership finalists, who will be in action at Twickenham on the same day. “We saw Japan play some excellent rugby during the World Cup and they will come to Edinburgh fully motivated to win,” said Gatland. “They are a talented side who play high-tempo rugby, so it’ll be a good challenge for us ahead of the tour, and a chance for the matchday squad to put their hands up for Test selection.” Gatland has been determined to arrange such a game before the Lions’ truncated eight-match tour but, assuming a full crowd is allowed into Murrayfield, it could be worth around £5m. Gatland had even raised the prospect of a “decider” against the All Blacks next June, following the drawn series in 2017, before the announcement of Japan as their opponents. “One of our objectives is to give Warren and the playing squad as much meaningful preparation as possible before departing on tour, so we are delighted to have agreed this fixture,” said Ben Calveley, the Lions’ managing director. “A Lions Test is one of the most iconic events in world sport, but a huge number of fans from the home nations never get the chance to see one live. It will be an ‘I was there’ moment, against an entertaining and highly respected opposition.” The Lions have played at home against Argentina in 2005 and the Rest of the World in 1986 and Gatland believes Japan, who reached the World Cup quarter-finals on home soil last year, will provide a suitably stern test, days before the Lions fly to South Africa. Gatland has repeatedly pleaded with Premiership Rugby to move its final next season to accommodate this fixture – just as the Pro14 has done – but he has been ignored. So players from the two sides who reach Twickenham will miss out on a chance to stake their claim for Gatland’s Test side. 15 J Stockdale (Ulster)14 A Conway (Munster)13 G Ringrose (Leinster)12 B Aki (Connacht)11 H Keenan (Leinster)10 J Sexton (Leinster, capt)9 C Murray (Munster)1 C Healy (Leinster)2 R Herring (Ulster)3 A Porter (Leinster)4 T Beirne (Munster)5 James Ryan (Leinster)6 C Doris (Leinster)7 W Connors (Leinster)8 CJ Stander (Munster) ReplacementsD Heffernan (Connacht), E Byrne (Leinster), F Bealham, U Dillane (both Connacht), P O’Mahony (Munster), J Gibson-Park, R Byrne, R Henshaw (all Leinster) Flanker Will Connors and wing Hugo Keenan will make their Test debuts when Ireland host Italy in Saturday’s Six Nations match in Dublin. The uncapped Leinster pair Ed Byrne and scrum-half Jamison Gibson-Park are also in line for their Test debuts off the bench at the Aviva Stadium.