Arsenal know how to leave it late but in adding Thomas Partey to Willian and Gabriel Magalhães they completed a window that will rightly delight Mikel Arteta. The unwanted Matteo Guendouzi and Lucas Torreira have been shifted, on loan at least, although their embarrassment of centre-backs remains far from ideal. Signing Houssem Aouar as well would have put them in dreamland but that may be revisited next year. Nick Ames Key ins Willian (Chelsea, free), Pablo Marí (Flamengo, £14m), Cédric Soares (Southampton, free), Gabriel Magalhães (Lille, £27m), Dani Ceballos (Real Madrid, loan extended), Rúnar Alex Rúnarsson (Dijon, £1.8m), Thomas Partey (Atlético Madrid, £45m) Key outs Henrikh Mkhitaryan (Roma, free), Emiliano Martínez (Aston Villa, £20m), Matteo Guendouzi (Hertha Berlin, loan), Lucas Torreira (Atlético Madrid, loan) Dean Smith has built on the solid defensive foundations he laid towards the end of last season, adding an excellent goalkeeper and exciting attackers, as Liverpool found out on Sunday. If the newcomers sustain their high performances and the team are spared the kind of injuries that sabotaged them last season, Villa could be heading for a top-half finish. Paul Doyle Key ins Matty Cash (Nottingham Forest, £16m), Ollie Watkins (Brentford, £28m), Emiliano Martínez (Arsenal, £20m), Bertrand Traoré (Lyon, £17m), Ross Barkley (Chelsea, loan) Key outs James Chester (Stoke, free), Borja Bastón (Leganés, free), Scott Hogan (Birmingham, £3m), Mbwana Samatta (Fenerbahce, loan) Aside from late moves for the young Polish duo Jakub Moder and Michal Karbownik, who have been loaned back to their clubs, it was a quiet end to the window for Graham Potter’s side. Brighton bought the Swiss striker Andi Zeqiri last week but perhaps their best business was to persuade the defender Ben White to sign a new contract. Ed Aarons Key ins Adam Lallana (Liverpool, free), Joel Veltman (Ajax, £900,000), Lars Dendoncker (Brugge, undisclosed), Jan Paul van Hecke (NAC Breda, £1.8m), Andi Zeqiri (Lausanne, £4m), Jakub Moder (Lech Poznan, undisclosed), Michal Karbownik (Legia Warsaw, undisclosed) Key outs Anthony Knockaert (Fulham, £15m), Leon Balogun (Rangers, free), Martín Montoya (Real Betis, £1.8m), Aaron Mooy (Shanghai SIPG, £4m), Glenn Murray (Watford, loan), Shane Duffy (Celtic, loan), Dale Stephens (Burnley, £1m), Jan Paul van Hecke (Heerenveen, loan), Jakub Moder (Lech Poznan, loan), Michal Karbownik (Legia Warsaw, loan) Keeping James Tarkowski amid firm interest from West Ham and Leicester was Burnley’s best move of an otherwise flat and troubling window. Sean Dyche admitted his squad were a few players short regardless of current injury problems, which have contributed to a winless start to the Premier League season, but there would be no late reinforcements. Andy Hunter Key ins Will Norris (Wolves, undisclosed), Dale Stephens (Brighton, £1m) Key outs Aaron Lennon (released), Joe Hart (Tottenham, free), Jeff Hendrick (Newcastle, free), Ben Gibson (Norwich, loan) Frank Lampard received huge backing. Kai Havertz, Hakim Ziyech and Timo Werner have strengthened the attack and Édouard Mendy, Ben Chilwell and Thiago Silva are capable of improving Chelsea’s defensive record. A worry, though, is that Chelsea’s squad looks a little bloated after Marcos Alonso, Emerson Palmieri and Antonio Rüdiger were unable to secure moves. Jacob Steinberg Key ins Hakim Ziyech (Ajax, £33.6m), Timo Werner (RB Leipzig, £47.5m), Ben Chilwell (Leicester, £50m), Malang Sarr (Nice, free), Thiago Silva (Paris Saint-Germain, free), Kai Havertz (Bayer Leverkusen, £72m), Édouard Mendy (Rennes, £22m) Key outs Mario Pasalic (Atalanta, £13.5m), Álvaro Morata (Atlético Madrid, £59.2m), Willian (Arsenal, free), Pedro (Roma, free), Ethan Ampadu (Sheffield United, loan), Michy Batshuayi (Crystal Palace, loan), Conor Gallagher (West Brom, loan), Davide Zappacosta (Genoa, loan), Ross Barkley (Aston Villa, loan), Tiemoué Bakayoko (Napoli, loan), Ruben Loftus-Cheek (Fulham, loan) The lack of late activity surrounding Wilfried Zaha ensured Palace kept their powder dry on deadline day despite monitoring Celtic’s Odsonne Édouard and Saïd Benrahma of Brentford. Late interest in Zaha from Atlético Madrid or Everton failed to materialise, with the Ivorian to remain at Selhurst Park for at least another three months. EA Key ins Nathan Ferguson (West Brom, free), Eberechi Eze (QPR, £16m), Michy Batshuayi (Chelsea, loan) Key outs Alexander Sørloth (RB Leipzig, £20m) The Premier League table provides an early but accurate gauge of Everton’s business, with the pulling power and heightened ambition of Carlo Ancelotti delivering the most fruitful window of the Farhad Moshiri era. Midfield, so bereft last season, was rebuilt, central defence was reinforced and a goalkeeper eventually arrived following an arduous search. AH Key ins Niels Nkounkou (Marseille, £240,000), Allan (Napoli, £22.5m), James Rodríguez (Real Madrid, £20m), Abdoulaye Doucouré (Watford, £20m), Ben Godfrey (Norwich, £20m), Robin Olsen (Roma, loan) Key outs Maarten Stekelenburg (Ajax, free), Morgan Schneiderlin (Nice, £2m), Oumar Niasse (released), Moise Kean (PSG, loan), Theo Walcott (Southampton, loan) Tony Khan made good on the promise he made after Fulham’s humbling by Aston Villa last week. Scott Parker wanted centre-backs and Fulham’s head of recruitment delivered on deadline day, landing Lyon’s Joachim Andersen and Manchester City’s Tosin Adarabioyo. The club also added a touch of class in midfield, loaning Ruben Loftus-Cheek from Chelsea. JS Key ins Anthony Knockaert (Brighton, £15m), Antonee Robinson (Wigan, £1.9m), Mario Lemina (Southampton, loan), Harrison Reed (Southampton, £6m), Alphonse Areola (PSG, loan), Kenny Tete (Lyon, £3m), Ola Aina (Torino, loan), Ademola Lookman (RB Leipzig, loan), Joachim Andersen (Lyon, loan), Ruben Loftus-Cheek (Chelsea, loan), Tosin Adarabioyo (Manchester City, £1.5m) Key outs Alfie Mawson (Bristol City, loan), Steven Sessegnon (Bristol City, loan), Marcus Bettinelli (Middlesbrough, loan), Cyrus Christie (Nottingham Forest, loan) Marcelo Bielsa is a famously discerning shopper and he has added quality while increasing competition for places. While Rodrigo adds to the attacking options and the left-footed Raphinha can operate on either wing, Robin Koch and Diego Llorente have reinforced central defence. Ideally Bielsa wanted a midfielder capable of introducing another tactical dimension and he may yet arrive from the Championship – Norwich’s Todd Cantwell anyone? Louise Taylor Key ins Hélder Costa (Wolves, £16m), Illan Meslier (Lorient, £5m), Jack Harrison (Manchester City, loan extended), Rodrigo (Valencia, £30m), Robin Koch (Freiburg, £12.9m), Diego Llorente (Real Sociedad, £23m), Raphinha (Rennes, £17m) Key outs None Brendan Rodgers wanted five players; he got three. Timothy Castagne has already shown his worth as a wing-back, making the sale of Ben Chilwell look like good business. Wesley Fofana boosts options in central defence and the winger Cengiz Under may prove more effective than Ayoze Pérez and Demarai Gray have been. A central midfielder would also have been welcome. PD Key ins Timothy Castagne (Atalanta, £21.5m), Cengiz Under (Roma, loan), Wesley Fofana (Saint-Étienne, £36.5m) Key outs Ben Chilwell (Chelsea, £50m), Fousseni Diabaté (Trabzonspor, £2.7m), Adrien Silva (Sampdoria, free), Rachid Ghezzal (Besiktas, loan) Jürgen Klopp cautioned it would be hard to improve the Premier League champions in normal circumstances, harder still with a pandemic impacting on finances, but Liverpool succeeded in the end with Thiago Alcântara embellishing midfield and the surprise signing of Diogo Jota strengthening their attacking options. Not adding central defensive cover looks risky, however. AH Key ins Kostas Tsimikas (Olympiakos, £11.8m), Thiago Alcântara (Bayern Munich, £27m), Diogo Jota (Wolves, £41m) Key outs Dejan Lovren (Zenit, £10.9m), Nathaniel Clyne (released), Adam Lallana (Brighton, free), Ki-Jana Hoever (Wolves, £9m), Loris Karius (Union Berlin, loan), Rhian Brewster (Sheffield United, £23.5m) Pep Guardiola’s signature signing is the £64.3m centre-back Rúben Dias and with fellow central defender Nathan Aké’s arrival for £41m the manager will hope he has finally addressed a defence that has been vulnerable. The winger Ferran Torres was acquired, too, for £21m but Guardiola was unable to add the left-back he believes is needed. Still, the total spend is more than £125m which should be sufficient, really, for City to seriously compete. Jamie Jackson Key ins Ferran Torres (Valencia, £21m), Nathan Aké (Bournemouth, £41m), Scott Carson (Derby, loan extended), Rúben Dias (Benfica, £64.3m) Key outs Leroy Sané (Bayern Munich, £40.9m), Jack Harrison (Leeds, loan extended), Claudio Bravo (Real Betis, free), Angeliño (RB Leipzig, loan extended), Nicolás Otamendi (Benfica, £13.6m), Tosin Adarabioyo (Fulham, £1.5m) Ole Gunnar Solskjær landed three major signings: midfielder Donny van de Beek and left-back Alex Telles for about a total £50m, plus Edinson Cavani on a free. Of these only Telles may be a first choice and there is anticlimax after a window-long pursuit for Jadon Sancho came to nothing, with no right winger acquired. Is the manager’s strongest XI stronger? Maybe but by how much is yet to be shown. JJ Key ins Odion Ighalo (Shanghai Shenhua, loan extended), Donny van de Beek (Ajax, £34.7m), Alex Telles (Porto, £13.6m), Amad Diallo Traoré (Atalanta, £18.2m), Edinson Cavani (PSG, free), Facundo Pellistri (Atlético Peñarol, £10m) Key outs Alexis Sánchez (Inter, free), Angel Gomes (Lille, free), Tahith Chong (Werder Bremen, loan), Andreas Pereira (Lazio, loan), Diogo Dalot (Milan, loan), Chris Smalling (Roma, £13.5m) For once, Newcastle did their shopping early. Callum Wilson has already started scoring the goals the team lacked last season, Ryan Fraser is a talented winger, Jamal Lewis a promising left-back and Jeff Hendrick a useful midfielder. There are, however, concerns that Steve Bruce could have done with another striker and central defender. LT Key ins Jeff Hendrick (Burnley, free), Callum Wilson (Bournemouth, £20m), Ryan Fraser (Bournemouth, free), Jamal Lewis (Norwich, £15m) Key outs Jack Colback (Nottingham Forest, free), Florian Lejeune (Alavés, loan), Yoshinori Muto (Eibar, loan) The Blades are stronger than they were, even if results have not yet shown that, but much will depend on Rhian Brewster, the 20-year-old brought in for a record fee to add sharpness to their attack. The goalkeeper Aaron Ramsdale should mean Dean Henderson is not missed too badly, while Ethan Ampadu, Jayden Bogle and Max Lowe provide much-needed defensive cover. PD Key ins Wes Foderingham (Rangers, free), Aaron Ramsdale (Bournemouth, £18.5m), Jayden Bogle (Derby, £7m), Max Lowe (Derby, £4m), Ethan Ampadu (Chelsea, loan), Oliver Burke (West Brom, swap), Rhian Brewster (Liverpool, £23.5m) Key outs Dean Henderson (Manchester United, loan ended), Callum Robinson (West Brom, swap), Ravel Morrison (Den Haag, free) Much of the focus inevitably surrounded Theo Walcott’s loan return but perhaps the best work was the clutch of deadline-day outgoings, with high earners Guido Carrillo, Sofiane Boufal and Wesley Hoedt following Mario Lemina out. Ralph Hasenhüttl would have liked cover at full-back – they inquired about Brandon Williams – but the permanent arrival of Kyle Walker-Peters looks shrewd and there is hope Ibrahima Diallo will beef up midfield. Ben Fisher Key ins Kyle Walker-Peters (Tottenham, £12m), Mohamed Salisu (Real Valladolid, £10.9m), Ibrahima Diallo (Brest, £12m), Theo Walcott (Everton, loan) Key outs Mohamed Elyounoussi (Celtic, loan extended), Pierre-Emile Højbjerg (Tottenham, £15m), Cédric Soares (Arsenal, free), Mario Lemina (Fulham, loan), Harrison Reed (Fulham, £6m), Maya Yoshida (Sampdoria, free), Wesley Hoedt (Lazio, loan), Guido Carrillo (Elche, free), Sofiane Boufal (Angers, free) José Mourinho has the knack of teasing funds out of chairmen and he has excelled himself this summer, getting new full-backs, the defensive midfielder he so badly wanted, a back-up striker and, drum roll, Gareth Bale. The bonus centre-half had not arrived by Monday night’s deadline but this has been a refit to get the fans excited. David Hytner Key ins Pierre-Emile Højbjerg (Southampton, £15m), Joe Hart (Burnley, free), Matt Doherty (Wolves, £14.7m), Sergio Reguilón (Real Madrid, £27.5m), Gareth Bale (Real Madrid, loan), Carlos Vinícius (Benfica, loan) Key outs Victor Wanyama (Montreal Impact, free), Michel Vorm (released), Troy Parrott (Millwall, loan), Kyle Walker-Peters (Southampton, £12m), Jan Vertonghen (Benfica, free), Juan Foyth (Villarreal, loan), Ryan Sessegnon (Hoffenheim, loan) Slaven Bilic acknowledged his squad required an injection of quality but the prolonged chase for a bona fide striker will run into next week. A modest budget by Premier League standards makes a deal for Huddersfield’s Karlan Grant, thought to be Albion’s top target, tricky but out-of-favour forwards Charlie Austin and Kenneth Zohore could depart. Matheus Pereira, Grady Diangana and Filip Krovinovic, all influential in winning promotion, returned but Albion remain light at both ends. BF Key ins Matheus Pereira (Sporting, £9m), Cédric Kipré (Wigan, £1m), Grady Diangana (West Ham, £18m), David Button (Brighton, £1m), Callum Robinson (Sheffield United, swap), Branislav Ivanovic (Zenit, free), Conor Gallagher (Chelsea, loan), Filip Krovinovic (Benfica, loan) Key outs Nathan Ferguson (Crystal Palace, free), Chris Brunt (Bristol City, free), Oliver Burke (Sheffield United, swap) West Ham promised that the £18m received for Grady Diangana from West Brom would allow David Moyes to sign some defenders. So far they have brought in only Vladimir Coufal, a right-back, for £5.4m. They failed with bids for several centre-backs – but they do have until 16 October to sign one from the Championship. JS Key ins Tomas Soucek (Slavia Prague, £19.1m), Vladimir Coufal (Slavia Prague, £5m) Key outs Carlos Sánchez (released), Pablo Zabaleta (released), Albian Ajeti (Celtic, £4.5m), Jeremy Ngakia (Watford, free), Jordan Hugill (Norwich, £5m), Roberto (Real Valladolid, free), Grady Diangana (West Brom, £18m), Jack Wilshere (released), Josh Cullen (Anderlecht, £800,000) Nuno Espírito Santo said he wanted this to be a season of change, with Wolves evolving into a team that dominate matches. They have sold two important players – Matt Doherty and Diogo Jota – and have lost Jonny Castro to injury but they kept Raúl Jiménez and Adama Traoré and have brought in several players with big potential, notably Fabio Silva and Vitinha. PD Key ins Fabio Silva (Porto, £35m), Marcal (Lyon, £1.8m), Vitinha (Porto, loan), Ki-Jana Hoever (Liverpool, £9m), Nelson Semedo (Barcelona, £27.6m), Rayan Aït Nouri (Angers, loan) Key outs Hélder Costa (Leeds, £16m), Matt Doherty (Tottenham, £14.7m), Diogo Jota (Liverpool, £41m), Rúben Vinagre (Olympiakos, loan)