There aren’t many certainties left in this increasingly barbaric and chaotic year of our fled Lord 2020, but one of the few remaining, to which I cling as if a drowning woman to driftwood, is this: as far as ever is possible, you should always be warned when a prolapse is in the offing. Let me perform this service to you before discussion of Channel 4’s new four-part drama Adult Material begins. Unlike the scene itself, we’ll ease into it. Let’s start at the beginning. Hayley Burrows (Hayley Squires) is a 33-year-old hardworking, devoted mother-of-three. Her hard work is as a porn star, Jolene Dollar. She is successful, respected and clear-sighted about exactly what she can get out of the industry – and what it can take. She keeps a weather eye out for the younger girls, including a 19-year-old first-timer Amy (Siena Kelly) who arrives on set starry-eyed (“My boyfriend worships you!”) and bouncing – soon literally, atop the organ around which the industry is built – with enthusiasm. “I love sex!” she tells Hayley/Jolene before they begin. “Well,” says Hayley, after a pause. “That’s a good place to start.” When a replacement girl is needed for an anal scene the director, Dave (Phil Daniels, at his slightly sweaty, squirrelly best), offers Amy the gig. “Nobody’s going to hold it against you if you don’t,” he says, maybe even meaning it. It’s one of the many light touches throughout showing that power relations are always in play. Hayley takes her outside and with rough kindness tells her what she actually needs to know: get as much money as you can for your first time, and be aware “that once it’s on the menu – it’s not coming off.” Hayley checks with Dave to find out who the scene is with. “Hairy Simon? Oh, he’s nice. Not too big. It’ll be like doing it with your boyfriend.” Amy, it turns out, doesn’t do it with her boyfriend and decides against the scene. “Don’t talk her into it,” Hayley warns Dave as she leaves for school pickup. “’Course not.” He does, of course. With the aforementioned result, which is so common there is an industry term for it after which the first episode is named – Rosebud. The rest of the series traces the domino effect of this first violation – whether you call it that of Hayley’s trust or Amy’s body. Adult Material, created and written by Lucy Kirkwood, lays down a confident track through a dramatic subject that is thick with well-worn tropes and established points of view (from the idea that participants are victims or perpetrators to denial that there can be any such dynamic in this simple world of shame-free shagging) and yet avoids them all. Her porn world is neither unbearably seedy nor unutterably glamorous. Hayley is neither desperately vulnerable nor completely free in her choices. She and her colleagues have camaraderie, and she’s not surrounded by creeps, but there are dangerous men on her radar. Kirkwood’s world is a fully realised one, recognisable to us all (if slightly more semen-spattered than we’re used to). That it often plays at length like a workplace comedy – the bored rattling off of health and safety questions and answers after the shoot (“Did you feel like you were raped during this shoot?” “No”) – means your defences are down when the moments come that confront the business they’re in. At one point, Hayley refuses to go to a party for a US porn kingpin, Tom Pain (Julian Ovenden), who caters to those with underage tastes. Dave tries to minimise his transgressions. “They look about 11,” she replies. “They’re meant to be 11. Some of them say: ‘I am 11.’” Adult Material is a study in how we compromise, protect ourselves, the effect of childhood experiences big and small on where we end up and of how much responsibility we bear to each other. And it holds all these light and dark elements in perfect balance. The performances are uniformly great, though Alex Jarrett as Hayley’s oldest child, Phoebe, deserves a special mention. In a few short, exquisitely written, scenes she covers immense and heartbreaking ground without even a fractional misstep. Much the same can be said of Adult Material in its entirety. It won’t satisfy moralistic blood-and-thunderers, because it insists on the complexity of the industry and its makers. But, by the same token, if the blood-and-thunderers would like some comfort, it will engage instead of alienate its users and maybe confront them with a little more truth than they would normally – forgive me – swallow.