There’s a chance the revelation that Boris Johnson will make Charles Moore, his friend, colleague in the Tory press and fellow traveller with the conspiratorial right, the new chairman of the BBC will turn out to be false. There’s a chance the PM has hitherto invisible red lines and would find such unashamed cronyism beneath even his shattered dignity. There’s a chance that the government’s “formal process” for deciding public appointments won’t be a sham. This side of the grave, there’s always a chance. But one week on, Johnson and Moore have not denied the story and it is clear that the government is, once again, considering erasing the dividing lines between politics and public service, professional life and private opinion. It looks as if it wants to carry on ensuring that only those who support the regime’s ideology are favoured, by handing the BBC to a crank who gives every indication of wanting to abolish it. The English class system makes it hard for even the most hard-bitten observers to see public-school boys as fanatics. Moore’s Eton College teaches its pupils to hide behind a mask of gentility. Our still deferential country cannot grasp that a man with good manners and received pronunciation can be as obsessional as a coronavirus conspiracist shouting at the pigeons in Trafalgar Square. It’s only when you go through Moore’s journalism for the Telegraph and the Spectator that you see an obsessive so lost in neuroticism that he damns BBC forecasters who “misrepresent the weather” and indoctrinate us into believing we prefer warm, sunny days to cold, wet ones. Truly, the machinations of cultural Marxists know no limit. For the British right, the BBC has become the cause of all their frustrations and an explanation for all their failures Moore is not alone in his delirium. The BBC has become, for the British right, what the tabloid press was for the socialists of the 20th century: the cause of all their frustrations and an explanation for all their failures. When Conservatives ask why the young won’t vote for them, why Christianity is in decline, why Israel is regarded as a pariah state, why Trump is feared, why anything and everything they hate is happening, the BBC is at the root of the evil. Or, as Moore put it in the Spectator, the BBC has “to learn not to call the thought police as soon as any person or topic they suspect of being right wing enters the studio”. And, if it doesn’t learn, he may soon be in a position to deliver the lesson personally. I can hear conservative readers making reasonable objections. Let me try to show how rigged public life is becoming by trying to answer them. Conservatives might say liberals disapprove of Moore because he is a man of the right. I can assure them that many of us would be as angry if a Jeremy Corbyn government had nominated a leftwing ideologue to run the BBC and we can think of several who would have been more than happy to censor for the state. They might say the BBC is biased against the right so the extreme measure of appointing a government crony is justified. I concede you can find examples of anti-rightwing bias. It would be astonishing in an organisation producing so much output if you could not. But before conservative readers sit back with a complacent smile, notice that the left is just as keen to claim that the BBC is a nest of brainwashers. After presenting a devastating Panorama documentary on the prevalence of antisemitism in Corbyn’s Labour party, the presenter, John Ware, received an apology and damages in settlement of his libel claim against Labour for falsely asserting he had made a “deliberate and malicious misrepresentations designed to mislead the public”. Is any honourable conservative confident a BBC with Charles Moore chairing the board would broadcast as devastating a documentary about the misdeeds of Johnson’s government? One might say that the BBC is a part of the British state and discussions about its governance are unavoidably political. So they are, but there is a dizzying gulf between an appointee who leans towards a political party and an appointee who is a lifelong campaigner for that party’s most militant ideas. To bring the difference into focus, imagine if Johnson proposed making Andrew Neil its next chair. Leftists would still highlight Neil’s rightwing views and demand he be stopped. His supporters might convincingly reply, however, that his views were an irrelevance. Neil has demonstrated he can leave his opinions at home when he goes to work. He interviewed politicians of all colours fearlessly. Viewers could guess that Neil would defend the BBC’s independence from attacks by the Johnson government. They cannot say the same about Moore. He might be a journalist in the broad sense of the word but, like Johnson and Michael Gove, he comes from a world of partisan commentary where facts and impartiality are seemingly disposable concepts. Moore knows no more about television than the average viewer in the living room. “I have no knowledge of technology,” he told Charlotte Higgins, the author of a history of the BBC. Moore has never worked in broadcasting. He has been a columnist, an editor and a biographer of Margaret Thatcher. There’s no reason why he should not pass his days as a man of letters and live in ignorance of the questions that broadcasters must face. But there is every reason why his ignorance should disqualify him from a senior position at the BBC. Johnson has given us law officers who reject the rule of law and cabinet ministers and senior civil servants whose only qualification for promotion was dog-like loyalty to the boss. He is now considering an assault on the independence of the BBC. We should not accept it as a part of “the new normal”. We should not pretend that attacks on public life don’t matter and mutter: “That’s just the way the world is today.” The rise of 21st-century authoritarianism has produced hundreds of studies. All their learned discussions about how a democracy becomes an authoritarian state can be distilled down to a one-word answer. Gradually. • Nick Cohen is an Observer columnist