Chris Hughton marked his first game in charge of Nottingham Forest with a late 1-0 win at Blackburn. The former Newcastle and Brighton manager, who replaced Sabri Lamouchi after Forest’s four-game losing start to the season, will have been extremely encouraged by the performance of his new charges at Ewood Park. The visitors looked solid and took hold of proceedings as the game wore on, with Thomas Kaminski saving well from Lyle Taylor and Sammy Ameobi, who also struck a post. They were eventually rewarded in the 90th minute through Joe Lolley’s deflected strike, which ended a run of six straight league defeats. At the top, Reading were held to a goalless draw at Middlesbrough, surrendering their 100% record, as did Bristol City in rather more dramatic fashion, conceding a 112th-minute equaliser in a 2-2 draw at Barnsley. Wycombe were finally able to celebrate their first goal in the second tier of English football but are still looking for a first point after Millwall came from behind to record a 2-1 victory at Adams Park. The Chairboys gave themselves hope of getting off the mark through Scott Kashket’s bizarre opener after Bartosz Bialkowski miscontrolled in his own six-yard box. However, a Jed Wallace penalty and a fine Ryan Leonard strike gave the visitors the points. Huddersfield robbed Swansea of their unbeaten record in the league as they won on the road for the first time in three months at the Liberty Stadium. Josh Koroma clinched a 2-1 victory with his first goal for the club in the 67th minute after the home side cancelled out Harry Toffolo’s opener with an André Ayew penalty. Jordan Hugill scored a stoppage-time penalty as Norwich came from behind to beat 10-man Rotherham 2-1. Freddie Ladapo gave Rotherham an early lead but then had a penalty saved by Tim Krul. Michael Ihiekwe’s own goal allowed Norwich to draw level midway through the second half. Angus MacDonald was sent off for the hosts before Hugill struck. Ipswich stayed top as Gwion Edwards' third goal in two matches set them on their way to a 2-0 win over Accrington at Portman Road. Edwards drove in his fifth league goal of the season to give Town a 55th-minute lead and Freddie Sears sealed the points with a neat finish from a tight angle after good work from Alan Judge. Hull moved up to second with a comfortable 3-0 victory at Rochdale.Mallik Wilks' header from Callum Elder's corner put the Tigers in front after 20 minutes and the forward made it five goals in his last five matches in all competitions with a sweetly-struck half-volley in the 73rd minute. Josh Magennis made the points safe shortly afterwards when he headed in George Honeyman's cross. Peterborough are fourth following a 2-0 win over Oxford. Joe Ward's neat lobbed finish from Jack Taylor's pass put Posh ahead two minutes before half-time and Siriki Dembele doubled their lead after 65 minutes with a drilled finish. Sunderland and Plymouth are both moving up after wins against Swindon and Northampton, respectively. Charlie Wyke was left all alone in the penalty area to volley the Black Cats in front and Chris Maguire made it 2-0 from the penalty spot. At Home Park, Plymouth took the lead after 41 minutes when Conor Grant's cross from the right was turned in at the near post by Frank Nouble, but Northampton levelled when Ricky Korboa slotted home. The Greens grabbed a 2-1 victory when Kelland Watts volleyed in from close range from a deep corner four minutes from time. Cameron Jerome scored his first goal in English football since 2018 as MK Dons ended their winless league start with a 2-0 victory over Gillingham, while Blackpool's poor start to the season continued with a 1-1 draw at Crewe. Nathan Jones tasted defeat against his former club as Stoke ended Luton’s unbeaten home record with a 2-0 win – Steven Fletcher and Nick Powell with the visitors’ goals. Cambridge moved to the summit by thrashing struggling Scunthorpe 5-0. Paul Mullin buried two penalties inside 10 minutes before the break to take his tally to seven league goals for the season. The visitors did not take their foot off the gas after the interval as Tyler Cordner's own goal made it 3-0. Scunthorpe's misery was compounded when Myles Hippolyte was shown a second yellow card after 55 minutes and Joe Ironside netted a double to make it 5-0. Newport are behind only on goal difference after a 1-0 win at Tranmere. Saikou Janneh gave the hosts a 25th-minute lead as he fired in from close range at a corner. Tranmere were left facing an uphill battle when Paul Lewis was shown a straight red card after 52 minutes. Morecambe missed the chance to stay top of the table after being hammered 4-0 at Crawley. Ian Henderson missed a first-half penalty and Salford, with Paul Scholes in temporary charge, were made to pay as a late goal from Cristian Montano secured Port Vale a 1-0 win. Cheltenham maintained their unbeaten start to the season with a routine 2-0 win at bottom side Southend. Zak Dearnley struck deep into added time to give Oldham a 2-1 win at Bolton. Jake Young scored his first senior goal to maintain Forest Green's unbeaten start with a 1-0 win over Stevenage and Jack Muldoon's superb strike gave Harrogate a 1-0 win over fellow League Two new boys Barrow. Ivan Toney’s double eased Brentford to a 2-0 win over Coventry, Barry Bannan’s 49th-minute penalty gave Sheffield Wednesday a 1-0 victory at Birmingham and Bournemouth were held to a 0-0 draw by QPR.