I am fascinated by all the British ingredients that are overlooked. Oats, for instance, are a glorious thing, packed with micronutrients, good fibre and more protein than most grains. While I will always love them for breakfast, cooked into porridge and covered in tahini, toasted sesame seeds, dates and date syrup (right?!), I have also recently started using them in the evenings, too. This deliciously savoury dinner is risotto-esque, and makes for beautiful, local food on your plate. The sweet, caramelised artichokes and rich, meaty flavour of the pancetta are delicious against the creamy, oat “risotto”. Prep 15 minCook 30 minServes 2-4 150g steel cut (AKA pinhead) oatsSalt and black pepper400g jerusalem artichokes400ml chicken stock300ml white wine50g butter2 round or 1 banana shallot, peeled and finely diced1 small handful fresh thyme leaves, plus extra to finish5 fat garlic cloves, peeled, 3 sliced, 2 crushed150g pancetta, diced small30g parmesan, finely grated, plus extra to finishExtra-virgin olive oil, to finish Put the oats in a large bowl, cover with plenty of water and leave to soak while you get on with the artichokes. Bring a pan of salted water to a boil. Cut the artichokes into 1cm-thick discs, drop them into the boiling water, then simmer for about 10 minutes, until tender to the point of a knife, but still holding their shape. Drain and set aside. In a small pan, warm the stock and wine. Melt half the butter in a casserole dish set over a medium-high heat, add the shallots, half the thyme and some salt and black pepper, and sweat for seven to eight minutes, turning down the heat a little if the shallots threaten to colour. Add the sliced garlic and cook, stirring often, for four to five minutes more. Meanwhile, drain the oats and add them to the onion pot. Pour in a quarter of the warm stock-wine mix and stir until it has been absorbed. Repeat three more times, stirring and beating in a quarter of the liquid at a time, until it has all been absorbed by the oats, which should by now be soft and have lost most of their bite. Stir in half the remaining butter and the parmesan, and set aside, ideally somewhere warm. While the oats are cooking, melt the last of the butter in a frying pan on a high heat, then saute the pancetta, artichokes and the rest of the thyme for five minutes, stirring regularly. Add the crushed garlic, fry until everything looks golden and crisp, then season to taste. Spoon pools of the risotto into shallow bowls and top with the artichoke and pancetta mixture. Scatter with a little extra thyme and parmesan, finish with a drizzle of good olive oil and serve at once. Pan-fried mushrooms make a delicious alternative topping for this risotto – just make sure you add masses of garlic. Or try charred sweetcorn and a tangy goat’s cheese. Or serve as an affordable and easy side for rosemary roast chicken thighs.