Three key factors put Trump at a high risk of suffering severe respiratory problems in the wake of his Covid-19 infection. Firstly, he weighs more than 17 stone. He is obese and that makes him 74% more likely to end up in an intensive care unit than a patient of a healthy weight. At the same time, he is 48% more likely to die. A second factor is his age: Trump is 74 and in an age bracket that suggests he is five times more likely to need hospital treatment than an 18 to 29-year-old – and 90 times more likely to die. And finally, he is male. Research suggests that men appear to be twice as likely to die from the disease as women. Reports indicate that Trump has been given two drugs: remdesivir and REGN-COV2. However, these medicines have still not completed full clinical trials and it is unclear how effective they are going to be in helping the president recover. Other medicines being administered to Trump include vitamin D, an antacid called famotidine, melatonin and aspirin. These are intended to alleviate his fever. Covid-19 can cause a dry, racking cough, high temperature and loss of sense of smell. These symptoms are sometimes mild but in other cases patients can be left feeling fatigued, drowsy and confused. Itchy eyes, runny nose and upset stomachs are also experienced during the first days of infection. According to Trump’s doctors, the president is displaying only mild symptoms. The danger period will come in the second week of his infection, when inflammatory reactions are typically triggered by the virus, causing severe respiratory problems – typically in those who are obese, male and old. Those who suffer particularly badly are put on ventilators to help them breathe. When the pandemic first struck, the majority of patients on ventilators died. However, survival rates have improved considerably since then. Trump has been taken to the Walter Reed National Military Medical Center in Bethesda, where previous US presidents and vice-presidents have been routinely treated for various ailments over the decades. The centre has a dedicated presidential office suite that includes a sitting room and a conference room. It is widely considered to be one of the most advanced hospitals in the US.