A further 367 people have died in the UK in the last day, the highest daily increase in five months and 50% higher than the daily increase last week. The figure is more than six times the daily death toll of 54 announced on 23 March when the national lockdown began. It confirms fears about the escalating second wave of the pandemic and brings the total of those who died within 28 days of testing positive to 45,365. It marks the highest daily increase since 27 May when 422 people were reported to have died. The government said that, as of 9am on Tuesday, there had been a further 22,885 lab-confirmed cases of coronavirus in the UK, bringing the total number to 917,575. Separate figures released by NHS England showed 207 patients who tested positive for coronavirus had died in English hospitals alone. The patients were aged between 36 and 101. All except six, aged 60 to 93, had known underlying health conditions. Richard Burgon, the Labour MP for Leeds East, pointed out there were now more Covid patients in the city’s hospitals than at the peak of the pandemic. There are now more Covid patients in Leeds hospitals than at the pandemic's peak.And 367 more coronavirus deaths across Britain today - the biggest increase since MayThis wasn't inevitable and we can still reverse this.But the Gov't must first admit its strategy is failing. A regional breakdown of the figures showed that 77 of these patients, or 37.2%, were in the north-west region of NHS England. Another separate set of figures which count fatalities where Covid-19 was mentioned on death certificates, showed the UK’s death toll from the virus exceeded 60,000 for the first time. The Office for National Statistics said that by 16 October there had been 61,116 Covid deaths based on this criteria. Dr Yvonne Doyle, medical director of Public Health England, said in a statement: “We continue to see the trend in deaths rising and it is likely this will continue for some time. “Each day we see more people testing positive and hospital admissions increasing. Being seriously ill enough from the infection to need hospital admission can sadly lead to more Covid-related deaths. “We can help to control this virus. We know that by washing our hands regularly, wearing a face covering and socially distancing we can save lives by slowing the spread of the virus.” The new figures come amid speculation that West Yorkshire will be moved into tier 3 coronavirus restrictions, while Nottingham is set to face the stringent measures on Thursday. In Scotland, Lanarkshire is being considered for the highest level of coronavirus restrictions under the country’s new tiered system, with the potential for travel restrictions and hospitality businesses closing. More than eight million people in England, predominantly in the north, will be under the tightest Covid-19 restrictions by the end of the week. Warrington entered tier 3 on Tuesday, meaning pubs and bars in the Cheshire town must close unless they serve substantial meals. Households are also banned from mixing indoors or in private gardens and beer gardens, while betting shops, adult gaming centres, casinos and soft play centres have been shut.