Australian cricket icon Greg Chappell has lavished praise upon emerging West Australian Cameron Green, describing him as the best batting talent since Ricky Ponting. Speaking only hours before Green was included in Australia’s white-ball squad for the first time for the upcoming series against India, Chappell said the 21-year-old could spearhead the Ashes campaign next year. Being compared to Ponting, recognised as arguably the best homegrown batsman since Don Bradman, is huge praise. Ponting dealt with huge expectations as a prodigious youngster early in his career before becoming Australia’s all-time leading Test run-scorer. “This kid can play – he’s a serious talent. I think he’s the best batting talent I’ve seen since Ricky Ponting,” Chappell told SEN. “He’s got something special in that he’s 6ft 7in tall, we haven’t seen anyone of that size dominate from a batting point of view. And the kid can bowl, so it’s a real challenge.” Being so tall and able to bowl long spells, Chappell has urged coaches against wearing Green’s young body down before he is ready. Green has played 17 first-class matches for WA, averaging 52.23 and scoring four centuries, while he has already claimed two five-wicket hauls with best figures of 6-30. “He’s already broken down once, so we’ve just got to be so careful because batting talent like this doesn’t come along very often,” Chappell said. “He’s a top-six batsman, he thinks of himself as a batsman; bowling is a bonus.” Chappell is excited about seeing Green feature in a batting line-up with stars David Warner, Steve Smith and Marnus Labuschagne. “Post Smith he’s batting three or four, and bowling 10 or 12 overs an innings max,” Chappell said. “He can win us the next Ashes if he gets a little experience between now and then. It’s exciting and we all get excited about this kind of talent. You don’t see this stuff very often.” Cricket Australia announced Australia’s ODI and T20 squads for the upcoming series against India on Thursday, with New South Wales all-rounder Moises Henriques was the other notable inclusion. The 33-year-old has not played for Australia since 2017. “Moises is a tremendous cricketer with loads of experience and is a great person to have around the group,” Australia selector Trevor Hohns said. “His form was extremely impressive in leading the Sixers to the BBL title last summer and he has played well at the start of this season. “Similarly, Cameron’s domestic form has been outstanding and he has carried it through for Western Australia this summer. As a potential player of the future this is an opportunity for him to be part of the squad and build on his experience.” The most notable omission from the 18-man squad was spinner Nathan Lyon, who can now put his focus into preparing for the four-Test series against India. Mitch Marsh, who sustained an ankle injury in the Indian Premier League, was also overlooked. The selectors are likely to bring Marsh back through the Australia A side for the tour matches. The ODI series gets underway in Sydney on November 27. Australia squad: Aaron Finch (captain), Sean Abbott, Ashton Agar, Alex Carey, Pat Cummins, Cameron Green, Josh Hazlewood, Moises Henriques, Marnus Labuschagne, Glenn Maxwell, Daniel Sams, Kane Richardson, Steven Smith, Mitchell Starc, Marcus Stoinis, Matthew Wade, David Warner, Adam Zampa.