When Exeter face Racing 92 in the European Champions Cup final they will be prepared for the French club’s match-winner Finn Russell, whose chip into space five minutes from the end salvaged victory against Saracens in the semi-final, thanks to one of the fly-half’s close friends. Stuart Hogg, who played alongside Russell at Glasgow as well as for Scotland, is in his second season with Exeter and will be providing the lowdown this coming week on someone he has known since they were boys. “Finn is an unbelievable talent, one of the best 10s in the world,” says Hogg, who has enhanced Exeter’s attacking game from full‑back. “He has the ability to change a game in a heartbeat and I know how he plays. He is one guy we are going to have to be wary of. It will be strange if I play because I can only remember being on the opposite side to him once, when we were playing under-14s rugby. “He is one of the most naturally talented players I have come across. Nothing fazes him: if he makes a mistake, he gets on with it. You think he does not care but deep down he truly does. Ask him to do a basic skill and he will say: ‘Stuff that,’ and chuck a 30-yard pass out of the back door which will be perfect. You have to give him the licence to play because he can change a game. I am happy he is Scottish.” Russell has not played for Scotland since last year’s World Cup after falling out with the coach, Gregor Townsend, when he reported late for a training camp before the Six Nations. Given Russell’s form for Racing in Europe, Townsend has a call to make before the rearranged match with Wales at the end of the month. “What has happened has happened and we cannot change anything,” Hogg says. “Finn would like this to be the end of it and nothing will be any different other than Finn Russell will be back playing at 10 for Scotland at the next opportunity. Gregor, Finn and I have had some difficult conversations and I know Finn just wants to concentrate on his career and never have to answer questions about his future again. I cannot wait for that to happen so I do not have to answer them.” Come Saturday, a new name will be etched on to the trophy first competed for in 1995-96, with Exeter in their first final and Racing intending to go one better than in 2016 and 2018 when they lost to Saracens and Leinster respectively. “They are a fantastic side and it should be one hell of a game,” Hogg says. “They have a similar approach to us, a forward pack that will be looking for dominance and a backline that wants to get ball in hand and express itself. “These are the games that made you pick up a rugby ball as a kid and to win this trophy you have to be able to beat the best, which we believe we can do.”