Tributes have flowed for Jacinda Barclay after the multi-sport star died aged 29. Barclay played in the AFLW for Greater Western Sydney Giants after a previous career in baseball, during which she represented Australia. She also played American football both in Australia and the US before returning to the game she loved as a child when the AFLW competition began in 2017. “Rest easy Barcs,” former Giants teammate Phoebe Monahan posted on Instagram. Barclay made 23 appearances for the Giants over four seasons after being drafted with pick 65 in the inaugural draft. “Jacinda was a much-loved member of the Giants family and we are all devastated by her passing,” said Giants chief executive David Matthews. “Jacinda gave up a great deal to follow her sporting dreams around the world and we are grateful that she called our club home for four years. “As an inaugural Giants AFLW player, Jacinda was a vital part of our club. More than that though, Jacinda’s spirit and infectious personality made her a popular and unforgettable member of the Giants family. She will always be a part of our club.” The AFL’s head of women’s football, Nicole Livingstone, said she was deeply saddened to hear of Barclay’s passing.“There are few words that we can express at this time, other than to convey our sadness and sincerest condolences to the Barclay family,” Livingstone said. “Jacinda’s loss will be taken very hard by so many people within our game across all levels.” Barclay appeared at five baseball World Cups between 2008 and 2016, winning a silver medal in 2010. Her American football career included a spell with the NSW Surge in the inaugural season of LFL Australia before she was poached by Chicago Bliss for America’s Legends Football League in 2016, when she won a championship in her first season. Steph Mur, one of Barclay’s gridiron teammates, said the Western Australian athlete was “every coach and player’s dream”. “The news is devastating and our hearts are breaking,” Mur wrote. “Jacinda lived a life that most people could only imagine. She was an elite multi-sport athlete constantly shredding boundaries around the world. “She was every coach and players’ dream – a fearless leader full of positivity, vast knowledge, eagerness to grow, and dedication to every team member. More importantly, she was an all-around badass person.” Crisis support services can be reached 24 hours a day: Lifeline 13 11 14 Suicide Call Back Service 1300 659 467 Beyond Blue 1300 22 4636