When US comedian Kelly Bachman found herself performing to a bailed Harvey Weinstein at a New York show in October 2019, she confronted him from the stage. But she was the only one who did, and later wrote in the New York Times: “A lot of the work in calling out rape, rapists, and rape culture unfortunately still falls on survivors … I want other people to speak up for us so that we don’t have to.” Similar pleas have come from women and nonbinary comedians in the UK, after the latest round of #MeToo revelations this summer. Mae Martin, London Hughes, Eleanor Tiernan, Sofie Hagen and others asked for men to take over the conversation about sexism and sexual harassment. When the majority of stories involve a male perpetrator, surely men need to be the ones making changes? On social media, some men have offered solidarity. When the Hollywood Reporter published rape allegations against UK comedian James Veitch, Nish Kumar tweeted: “Another day saluting brave women […] Fucking hell lads, we need to change and we need to do it now.” David O’Doherty added onj Twitter: “We all – industry, but in particular male comedians – need to act more decisively when you hear of any issue.” Veitch declined to comment, but a source close to him said he denied all allegations, according to the Hollywood Reporter. For those who’ve experienced sexism and harassment at the hands of male colleagues, it’s not a given that men want to see change. Ed Night, whose 2018 Edinburgh Fringe show An Aesthetic tackled harassment in comedy, says men shouldn’t hesitate to speak out against abuse and sexism. “A man recently told me they were worried about talking about feminism in case anyone thought they had an ulterior motive,” he says. “But that’s like ‘cancel culture’: it’s a deliberate impediment to talking about the things we should be talking about.” Wariness of “virtue-signalling” isn’t the only barrier. Night had to temper his material to avoid legal repercussions. Others fear career damage, prioritise their friendship with the accused, or simply don’t know what action to take. Many women in comedy I spoke to this year reported being harassed or belittled while other men present did nothing. For them, the inaction of colleagues was unforgettable. Daniel Sloss asked men to shake this paralysis in his standup show X, where he recalls confronting a male friend accused of rape: “Don’t make the same mistake I made for years, which was sitting back and being like: ‘I’m not part of the problem, therefore I must be part of the solution.’” While the men I spoke to all agree there’s a serious problem, others still need convincing. “It’s mostly the old guard who seem to be wilfully ignorant or genuinely oblivious,” says standup Pope Lonergan. One-to-one conversations between men could change minds. But the first step is listening to women. Night says: “Believe people and realise that people can be lovely to you and horrific to somebody else. Chances are, if you’re a cis man, you’re not having these things imposed on you or you’re seeing these things and not realising what is happening.” You hear about people you’ve known for years and you’re like: ‘Wow, I’ve got no radar for this stuff … it could be anyone’ Men need to prepare themselves to hear allegations against men they know and like – and respond in the same way they would to allegations about a stranger. Lonergan says: “Most names were no surprise to me, [but] I was pretty gutted by some of them – people I admire.” Sean Morley, standup comedian and co-host of Mandatory Redistribution Party podcast, agrees: “You hear about people you’ve known for years and you’re like: ‘Wow, I’ve got no radar for this stuff … it could be anyone’.” Women and nonbinary comedians have long relied on the “whisper network”. Over summer, male comics and producers asked women to share the whispers but, Lonergan says, men aren’t entitled to this information: “I’ve been guilty of automatically assuming I’ll be seen as a benign, approachable person. But … perpetrators don’t wear ‘I’m a rapist’ badges, so women are rightfully conditioned to be wary.” For men trying to avoid working with potential abusers, the information they are trusted with is vital. “The job of the whisper network is not to tell me who to work with, it’s to keep women safe,” says Morley. “But there are times when I’ve found out when I’ve already signed a contract that this person you’re going to be working with is bad. I feel trapped at that point.” In those situations, Morley says, you can at least avoid working with them in future. As many women have experienced, this can mean losing earnings and openings – a fact that’s ensured protection for abusive men who control work opportunities. Reflecting on the impact of complicity is part of a process of self-examination for Lonergan. While he has challenged men making rape jokes in green rooms, in conversations with female comedian friends he has heard how his own “ironic” sexist jokes caused discomfort. That was hard to hear. However, “We have a duty to have those conversations, and for men to initiate them. I know women are tired of having to walk men through this. We can have these conversations amongst each other, not looking for forgiveness, looking to re-route that behaviour.” Morley agrees that all men need to reflect: “It’s important to get beyond the ‘bad egg’ way of thinking, because no one wants to admit this applies to them. Society is misogynistic. You have to accept that somewhere, some of that stuff has snuck in.” Part of that can be making effort to notice language and behaviour that’s less obviously part of rape culture: “Every man considers themselves: ‘I’m one of the good ones and if I were to see one of these black-and-white situations, I would leap on it.’ But what you get is subtle stuff where it’s like: is that a little bit off? People need to stick their oar in if they think someone’s wrong.” One tactic that’s been used to tackle sexual harassment on US university campuses is bystander intervention. Julie Dennis, head of diversity and inclusion at the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service says male bystanders can play a crucial role. There are three key actions: diffusing a situation, empathising with survivors, and addressing perpetrators. Where you’ve got a man being sexist and you’ve got other men saying, ‘You’re out of order’, they’re going to re-evaluate Simply showing disapproval can be effective. Dennis suggests: “‘What you just said made me feel uncomfortable’ or ‘I don’t find that funny’. People think everyone agrees with them, so where you’ve got a man being sexist and you’ve got other men saying, ‘You’re out of order’, they’re going to re-evaluate.” Night says that group efforts to enact change are vital in comedy, where most are working solo: “Self-reflective individual change has to happen concurrently with collective efforts to oust people who have done bad things.” In the absence of an industry union or HR structures, comics can collectively support one another in “sticking to your guns if it means not working for someone, talking to other people about it if you feel you’re not defying anyone’s wishes by doing so, and keeping it forefront in your mind that you’re going to call this stuff out when you see it.” Meanwhile, agents, producers and people who run festivals can ensure performers have safe travel and sleeping arrangements when attending gigs. When Night started writing An Aesthetic in January 2018, he felt sure that by the show’s debut in August, the actions of one of the men discussed would be public knowledge. Nearly three years later, that’s still not the case. Legally, he says, “There’s only so much you can say.” But that shouldn’t stop men from joining the fight for a safer workplace.