Bristol City stayed second behind Reading after Nahki Wells’ late penalty secured a 1-1 draw against Swansea. Jamal Lowe’s 51st-minute goal put the Swans in control at Ashton Gate, only for Wells to make no mistake from the spot in the 83rd minute. “This league is so hard to get points in and to be on the back end of a decision like that is a difficult one to take,” said Swansea manager Steve Cooper of the penalty decision. “I thought we looked really comfortable in what was a decent game of football. For the boys to defend that well, and then get done like that is hard.” Jason Tindall admitted his Bournemouth side were lucky not to have Lloyd Kelly dismissed in the opening minutes of their 1-1 draw with Watford at Vicarage Road. The central defender appeared to rake his studs down the leg of Ismaïla Sarr after barely a minute, but referee Tim Robinson opted to show a yellow card. That decision proved vital for Tindall’s side, who recovered from conceding an 11th-minute goal to Stipe Perica to rescue a point in the sixth minute of stoppage time. Chris Mepham turned home Kelly’s shot as it was flying wide to maintain Bournemouth’s unbeaten start. “On another day that could have been a red,” said Tindall. “But Lloyd’s not that type of character where he will purposely do something like that with malice or intent. He’s been out for a month and I think that showed in the opening half hour. But we deserved the equaliser: we controlled the game.” Stoke extended their unbeaten run to five league games with a dramatic 3-2 win over Brentford. Steven Fletcher and James McClean put the Potters 2-0 ahead at the break before Tyrese Campbell added a third on the hour. Marcus Forss then netted twice in the final 20 minutes to set up a nervy finale. Millwall drew 1-1 against Barnsley without manager Gary Rowett in the dugout. Rowett recently contracted coronavirus and, after Alex Mowatt’s stunning volley gave winless Barnsley the lead in front of their new manager Valérien Ismaël, his side secured a point through Jake Cooper’s header before half-time. Rowett’s assistant, Adam Barrett, said the manager was “feeling OK … He was still able to do his meeting by video. Hopefully he’s back in the dugout soon.” Wycombe suffered a seventh consecutive defeat after Mario Vrancic’s stunning free-kick at the death secured Norwich a 2-1 win at Carrow Road. Wycombe looked to have won their first point of the campaign having equalised through Scott Kashket following Teemu Pukki’s opener, but they were denied by Vrancic’s stunner, with Adam Idah then sent off for the hosts. Alan Browne struck his first Football League double in the space of two second-half minutes as Preston beat Huddersfield 2-1. After Fraizer Campbell put the in-form Terriers ahead in the eighth minute, North End turned the game around through Browne to secure their third consecutive away win. Town had Naby Sarr sent off with 12 minutes remaining. Sheyi Ojo denied Middlesbrough manager Neil Warnock a win on his return to former club Cardiff. George Saville’s 36th-minute header put Boro ahead before Ojo’s close-range effort salvaged a 1-1 draw. Warnock called referee Jon Brooks’ decision to allow the equaliser “a disgrace … it’s an obvious foul. They blocked Saville to get a free header. Referees at this level should be able to see things like that.” Adam Armstrong took his goal tally for the season to eight with a brace in Blackburn’s 4-0 romp at 10-man Coventry. City had Michael Rose sent off after 15 minutes, leading to Armstrong’s opener from the spot, with Liverpool loanee Harvey Elliott scoring his first for the club then setting up Sam Gallagher. Manager Tony Mowbray said he was “delighted with the quality at the top end – young Elliott is really tight with the ball, and Adam does what he does.” Bottom-placed Sheffield Wednesday remain on minus four points after losing 1-0 at home to Luton. Shortly after Joost van Aken’s 70th-minute red card, Pelly Ruddock Mpanzu struck for the Hatters. QPR and Birmingham, meanwhile, are both without a win in six matches after a lacklustre goalless draw.