Reported to be one of the largest art heists in history, in the early hours of 18 March 1990, $1bn-worth of paintings were stolen from the walls of Boston’s Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum, including a Rembrandt and a Vermeer. Then, 29 years later, the journalist John Wilson received a tipoff that the works were about to be recovered – not in Boston, as the FBI had assumed, but in west Dublin. This documentary recounts Wilson’s investigative journey into the hidden economy, as well as the work of his source, Charley Hill. Ammar Kalia It is the penultimate episode of this enjoyable comedy and Mike (Kiell Smith-Bynoe) is spending his first night alone in the house with the ghosts while Alison (Charlotte Ritchie) takes an evening off to go out with friends. Uninvited guests soon disrupt his plans, though, leading the ghosts to try to sound the alarm. AK An examination of the 2019 Christchurch mosque shootings, which were livestreamed by the perpetrator. As well as the attack’s effect on the Muslim community, there is analysis of how the crime was influenced by far-right memes. We meet experts and activists who are fighting back online. Jack Seale Phillip Schofield presents this task-oriented gameshow, taking place inside the mystery Cube, where “everything is harder” – either because of the glare of the studio lights or perhaps because of a limited oxygen supply? With a £1m prize at stake, tonight’s sibling contestants have their work cut out. AK Tic (Jonathan Majors), Leti (Jurnee Smollett) and pals prepare for a final showdown in a series that has been a wild, gorgeously upholstered ride through black history genre conventions. There’s still no word on whether it will be renewed, however. Time to offer a blood sacrifice to your preferred cosmic entity. Ellen E Jones The dark drama continues with Jolene (Hayley Squires) now a world away from the adult film industry and suffering financially without the work. With her court case looming, fallen MP Stella Maitland (Kerry Godliman) offers to defend her, while the pair seek out some lost footage that may help. Hannah Verdier The Ladykillers (Alexander Mackendrick, 1955), 4.55pm, Film4 An exceptionally black Ealing comedy, with Alec Guinness as the sinister Prof Marcus, a master crook who is lodging at sweet old Katie Johnson’s house. When his gang – including Peter Sellers and Herbert Lom – swipe £60,000 in a raid, they decide the old girl has to go. But they stand no chance. Paul Howlett Tenpin bowling: Weber Cup 1pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Day one of Europe v USA at Ricoh Arena, Coventry. IPL Cricket: Chennai Super Kings v Rajasthan Royals 2.50pm, Sky Sports Cricket. T20 clash from Abu Dhabi. Premier League Football: Leeds United v Wolverhampton Wanderers 7pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Top-flight clash at Elland Road.