A crowd at the MCG for the Boxing Day Test has been all but guaranteed by Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews as the state’s coronavirus restrictions were significantly eased. Melbourne will start to open up following more than four months in hard lockdown, after no Covid-19 cases were recorded in Victoria on Monday. Cricket Australia is yet to lock in its international schedule for a summer highlighted by a blockbuster four-Test series against India. Premier Andrews said the lifting of restrictions meant it was too late for crowds to attend next month’s Melbourne Cup, but not the biggest day in Australian cricket. “The Boxing Day Test of course is very different because that is some way off,” he told reporters. “I am very confident that we will get a crowd at the MCG for the Boxing Day Test. I don’t know how big it will be but there will be a crowd. That’s the advice that I have, that’s what we’re working towards.” More than 80,000 people attended day one of last year’s Boxing Day Test as Australia crushed New Zealand. In 2018 – the last time Virat Kohli’s India toured – 73,516 fans were on hand at the MCG for day one. The NSW government has signed off on CA’s quarantine proposal, with an updated schedule for India’s tour expected to be finalised soon. It came a day after the Victoria Racing Club announced the Melbourne Cup carnival will be held behind closed doors with no crowds. The carnival attracts crowds of up to 90,000 for major races and is highlighted by the $8 million Cup, which is raced on the first Tuesday in November and known as ‘the race that stops the nation’. “While we are very disappointed not to be able to welcome our members and racegoers to Cup Week, we understand the government’s commitment to keeping our community safe,” VRC chairman Amanda Elliott said in a statement on Sunday. “What is certain is the Melbourne Cup Carnival will go ahead with viewing audiences watching from across Australia and around the world.” Elliott said the VRC were still negotiating with the Victoria state government about the possibility of a small number of owners attending. A top Australian sports official was forced to apologise and reverse a decision earlier this month to allow a limited number of people to attend the $5 million Cox Plate at nearby Moonee Valley. The carnival, comprising Victoria Derby Day, Melbourne Cup Day, Oaks Day and Mackinnon Stakes Day, is due to start on Saturday with four Group 1 races, including the A$2 million Victoria Derby for three-year-olds.