What will I do when I run out of fingers? How will I keep track of the masked months – March, April, May, June, July, August, September, October – the counting of which has been my habit ever since the national lockdown began? I have no idea why counting the months is reassuring, but it is. Also, how to keep track of the dozens of masks we have accumulated over the last seven months? Blue gauze masks, homemade and themed masks, Ikea and plumbing masks; we have dozens, which, despite our best efforts, are everywhere – and then nowhere when you need one. Masks are the sharp pencils of 2020. They have also been largely unquestioned in Italy, a country where, normally, rules are obstacles to be overcome; a badly organised, badly governed country, apparently. Not when it came to lockdown, however, which was as clear as a starting pistol. Or when it comes to masks: you go out, you wear a mask. When you do go out, you sit out. For the past seven months, tables and chairs spilling on to the streets have been counted as a good thing. Roman bars and restaurants that have long battled with councils and local laws for permission to have seating outside have been granted it – for a year, at least. Our first-floor flat is almost directly above a bar run by two Neapolitan brothers, a tiny place that has now doubled in size thanks to a raised platform on what was four parking spaces on the street outside: people before parking, espresso and orange Fanta before fumes. In a street shooting off the main piazza, our local trattoria, Piatto Romano, also has a raised platform outside, quite literally breathing space in an otherwise devastating year. Inside, it is still well-spaced, and the protocol as clear as the hand sanitiser that sits at the door. Unchanged is the presence of the trolley full of vegetables in season: the last of the summer beans – especially mottled borlotti – for the first of the autumn minestre. I have written about Roman bean soups (minestre) several times before, so I hope you don’t mind yet another variation. This recipe, inspired by the bean minestre at Piatto Romano, but also the chef Sara Levi of the American Academy in Rome, includes clams. Beans and seafood are a popular combination in Italy, and especially in Lazio, because they pair so well, and also because the liquor created when the shells open acts as the most extraordinary seasoning for the soft and gentle beige bean soup. Also, it is a way to make a few clams go a long way. I have taken Sara’s lead and pureed the soup completely, but you could decide to puree just half. If lockdown goes on longer than 10 months, which it most probably will, I know I can just do another round of counting fingers. After all, things can’t get any more confusing than they already are. I am also going to make this soup again and just puree half, and make some fried cubes of bread to drop in it, too. Which reminds me, I need to go out to buy bread … if I can find a mask. Prep 5 min Cook 15 minServes 4-6 1 small onion, peeled and finely diced6 tbsp olive oil 500g cooked beans (borlotti, cannellini or other small white bean), cooked from scratch, or drained tinned beans1 litre bean cooking water, or salted water300g fresh clams1 small garlic clove, peeled150ml white wine In a deep saucepan or casserole, gently fry the onion in four tablespoons of the olive oil until soft and translucent. Add the cooked beans and a litre of their cooking water, bring to a boil and reduce to a simmer for 10 minutes. Meanwhile, in a frying pan, warm the whole clove of garlic in the remaining two tablespoons of oil for two minutes, add the clams, raise the heat, add the wine and cover. Once you hear the clams opening, lift the lid and remove them with a slotted spoon. When they are all open, remove from the heat and filter the clam liquor. Separate the clam flesh from the shells and set it aside, keeping just a few shells for decoration. Blend the soup (or half-blend it, if you prefer) until smooth, taste and add enough clam liquor to season. If it seems too thick, add a little water. Ladle into bowls, top each with some of the clam flesh, a few shells, a pinch of red chilli and a zigzag of olive oil.