Lyle Taylor rescued a point for Nottingham Forest with his first goal for the club in a 1-1 draw with Derby but Phillip Cocu accused the linesman of robbing his side of victory. Taylor poked home from close range in the 64th minute to cancel out Martyn Waghorn’s brilliant first-half opener. The Rams had enjoyed the better of the first-half chances and deservedly went ahead when Waghorn scored with a 25-yard free-kick on the half-hour mark. Derby thought they had won it late on when Kamil Jozwiak had a goal ruled out for offside. “I am not happy, because we have had a win stolen from us, that is very clear,” said Cocu. “I do not like talking about the referees but they make me do it. Their goal was a carbon copy of our second goal, one was a goal and one wasn’t. Someone jumps over the ball from a corner and someone jumps over the ball and doesn’t block the view of the keeper, so that is the frustration. “The opposition bench and no players protested, they all saw it as a goal. The linesman raised his flag and stole our win. A lot is not going in our favour. I am the first one to say that we had to step up after the first three games, and we have started to play well and show the attitude we expect from our team.” Forest are unbeaten in three matches under Chris Hughton but the new manager felt his side had not done enough to win the game after their slow start. “We started slow against a Derby team that played with a 5-4-1 and broke well off it,” he said. “They have got good players that can receive the ball and do well. We did not break them down in the first half well enough. “Is it two points dropped? We did not do well enough in the first half to perhaps deserve the win. Lyle Taylor is still getting up to speed, he’s not played a lot of games. I’m pleased for him and that he got his goal. We will need him up to speed. I would like to think we are building a base here to take the team forward.” Waghorn put the Rams ahead with a superb 25-yard free-kick that went in off the crossbar on the half hour. Graeme Shinnie should have doubled the lead when he shot straight at the keeper after Nathan Byrne played him in seven minutes later. The lively Ryan Yates headed straight at David Marshall from Nicholas Ioannou’s cross on the stroke of half-time as Forest struggled for ideas. Marshall turned an Anthony Knockaert cross behind as Sammy Ameobi prepared to pounce, but Forest levelled from the resulting corner when Taylor slotted home from inside the six-yard box. Jozwiak had a goal ruled out by the linesman after Waghorn strayed into an offside position with 13 minutes left. Lee Buchanan had a shot deflected behind with five minutes to go as Derby pushed for a late winner.