What were you hoping for?I try to go on dates with no expectations. You never know what kind of a connection you’ll have with a person: that’s the fun of it. First impressions?Really pretty, and I liked her low voice and red lipstick. What did you talk about?Our names being misspelled a lot, feeling disconnected from the British class system, the National Portrait Gallery, the difficulty of delineating personal responsibilities in light of the government’s pandemic policy failures. Any awkward moments?Maybe me getting too tipsy and slurring a little about 20 minutes into the date, since I’m a lightweight. Good table manners?She had the good sense to order us negronis – perfect for a hot evening. Best thing about Rivkah?She seems really fun and genuine. I could talk to her about anything, and she had a lot of interesting stories to tell. Would you introduce her to your friends?Absolutely, if she’d want to. Describe Rivkah in three words?Lovely, expressive, sincere. What do you think she made of you?I had just had my first day at my new job, and my brain was a bit fried. So I was worried I didn’t ask enough questions and seemed too self-centred. Did you go on somewhere?I walked her home. If it weren’t for physical distancing, would you have kissed?I would have liked to have given her a goodnight kiss, at least. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I wish I had been more attentive, and less overwhelmed by work. Marks out of 10?9.5. Would you meet again?I would really like to. We exchanged numbers and discussed the possibilities of going for a cycle, or walk around a gallery. Blind date is Guardian Weekend magazine’s dating column: every week, two strangers are paired up for dinner and drinks, and then spill the beans to us, answering a set of questions. This runs, with a photograph we take of each dater before the date, in Guardian Weekend magazine (in the UK) and online at theguardian.com every Saturday. It’s been running since 2009 – you can read all about how we put it together here.What questions will I be asked?We ask about age, location, occupation, hobbies, interests and the type of person you are looking to meet. If you do not think these questions cover everything you would like to know, tell us what’s on your mind. Can I choose who I match with?No, it’s a blind date! But we do ask you a bit about your interests, preferences, etc – the more you tell us, the better the match is likely to be. Can I pick the photograph?No, but don't worry: we'll choose the nicest ones. What personal details will appear?Your first name, job and age. How should I answer?Honestly but respectfully. Be mindful of how it will read to your date, and that Blind date reaches a large audience, in print and online. Will I see the other person’s answers?No. We may edit yours and theirs for a range of reasons, including length, and we may ask you for more details. Will you find me The One?We’ll try! Marriage! Babies! Can I do it in my home town?Only if it’s in the UK. Many of our applicants live in London, but we would love to hear from people living elsewhere. How to applyEmail blind.date@theguardian.com What were you hoping for?A good way to meet new people during Covid-19. First impressions?Lovely hair, very talkative. I was grateful she also needed a drink and went straight in for a negroni. What did you talk about?Studying, queerness/polyamory, how weird having our picture taken was, but how nice the photographer was. Any awkward moments?I kept swearing, and then realised she did not say one swear word all evening... Good table manners?We both commented on how table manners were not a priority over enjoying the food, but she let me have the pickled egg, so that was a plus. Best thing about Kaisa?She’s super smart and speaks seven languages, which is six more than I do. Would you introduce her to your friends?I think she would like some of my friends more than she would like me. Describe Kaisa in three words?Smart, interesting, independent. What do you think she made of you?I think she may have thought I was a bit crass. She said she thought I was interesting. Did you go on somewhere?We live in the same area, so we walked home together. If it weren’t for physical distancing, would you have kissed?I felt the vibe was more friendly. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I would have gone for the mushroom pizza instead of the halloumi. Marks out of 10?7. Would you meet again?We said we might go on a walk around the area one day, we’ll see. • Rivkah and Kaisa ate at Flat Earth Pizzas at the Plough, London E9. They were photographed separately for this image. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com.