Chelsea have turned down an offer from Bayern Munich for Callum Hudson-Odoi, rejecting the German side’s attempt to land the winger in a deal worth £70m. Bayern want Hudson-Odoi to join them on loan for the rest of the season with an option to buy for £70m next summer. Chelsea’s decision leaves the European champions with a short timeframe to decide whether to try again before the transfer window shuts on Monday. It is believed Chelsea could agree to the move if Bayern return with an obligation to make the deal permanent next summer. Frank Lampard, Chelsea’s manager, said he wanted to keep Hudson-Odoi after his side’s 4-0 win over Crystal Palace on Saturday. However, Bayern have long held an interest in the 19-year-old and were close to landing him before he signed a new five-year deal last September. The German champions are looking for more options on the flanks, even though they have signed Leroy Sané to compete with Serge Gnabry and Kingsley Coman. Hudson-Odoi, who has struggled to regain top form since suffering an achilles injury in April 2019, could have a difficult decision to make in the next 48 hours. He has not been a regular since Lampard’s arrival at the start of last season and is competing for a starting place with Hakim Ziyech, Christian Pulisic, Timo Werner and Kai Havertz. While Hudson-Odoi is not desperate to leave after emerging from Chelsea’s academy, he needs game time to earn a place in England’s squad at next summer’s European Championship. He started against Palace but Lampard has urged him to work harder in training and admitted that uncertainty remains over his future after the win over Roy Hodgson’s side. “There is no definitive answer,” Lampard said. “By Monday we will know the answer. They might have declared their interest, which is one thing, but as I have just said there in terms of the squad, everything that happens by Monday will be things that are firstly good for us as a club because Callum is our player, and what Callum wants comes into consideration. “It has to be right for everybody. At the minute I want Callum as part of my squad, especially with what he offered up today and the second half against West Brom. That is where I am at.”