The government’s new rules have created a three-tier system with increasing restrictions depending on the designated alert level. Here is a summary of the main rules that apply under the different tiers. The ‘“rule of six” applies, meaning socialising in groups larger than six people is prohibited whether indoors or outdoors. Tradespeople can continue to go into a household for work and are not counted as being part of the six-person limit. Businesses and venues can continue to operate but pubs and restaurants must ensure customers only consume food and drink while seated, and close between 10pm and 5am. Takeaway food can continue to be sold after 10pm if ordered by phone or online. Schools and universities remain open. Places of worship remain open but people must not mingle in a group of more than six. Weddings and funerals can go ahead with restrictions on the number of people who can attend (15 and 30 respectively). Exercise classes and organised sport can continue to take place outdoors, and – if the rule of six is followed – indoors. People are prohibited from socialising with anybody outside their household or support bubble in any indoor setting. Tradespeople can continue to go into a household for work. The rule of six continues to apply for socialising outdoors, for instance in a garden or public space like a park or beach. Businesses and venues can continue to operate but pubs and restaurants must ensure customers only consume food and drink while seated, and close between 10pm and 5am. Takeaway food can continue to be sold after 10pm if ordered online or by phone. Schools and universities remain open. Places of worship remain open but people must not mingle in a group of more than six. Weddings and funerals can go ahead with restrictions on the number of people who can attend (15 and 30 respectively). Exercise classes and organised sport can continue to take place outdoors but will only be permitted indoors if it is possible for people to avoid mixing with those they do not live with (or share a support bubble with), or for youth or disability sport. Travel is permitted to amenities that are open, for work or to access education, but people are advised to reduce the number of journeys where possible. People are prohibited from socialising with anybody they do not live with, or have not formed a support bubble with, in any indoor setting, private garden or at most outdoor hospitality venues and ticketed events. Tradespeople can continue to go into a household for work. The rule of six continues to apply to outdoor public spaces, such as parks, beaches, public gardens or sports venues. Pubs and bars are only permitted to remain open to operate as restaurants, in which case alcohol can only be served as part of a substantial meal. Schools and universities remain open. Places of worship remain open but household mixing is not permitted. Weddings and funerals can go ahead with restrictions on the number of people attending (15 and 30 respectively) but wedding receptions are not allowed. The rules for exercise classes and organised sport are the same as in tier 2. They can continue to take place outdoors but will only be permitted indoors if it is possible for people to avoid mixing with people they do not live with (or share a support bubble with), or for youth or disability sport. Travelling outside a very-high alert level area or entering a very-high alert level area should be avoided other than for things such as work, education or youth services, to meet caring responsibilities or if travelling through as part of a longer journey. Residents of a tier 3 area should avoid staying overnight in another part of the UK, while people who live in a tier 1 or tier 2 area should avoid staying overnight in a very-high alert level area.