Jamie Webster is recalling the moment he became the first artist to top the newly created Official Folk Album Chart with his debut LP, We Get By. “I was stunned”, says the Liverpool musician. “To hold off Laura Marling? She’s miles ahead of me in her career. I bet most people in the chart looked at it and went: ‘Who is Jamie Webster?’” Folk traditionalists might well wonder: Webster has taken an unusual route to the top of the charts. A former electrician, the 26-year-old progressed from playing covers in city-centre pubs to becoming the semi-official musician for Liverpool FC, performing at fan-affiliated events and composing songs for the terraces. After a video of him playing Allez Allez Allez, his reworking of Italo disco classic L’Estate Sta Finendo, went viral in 2018, the song became the soundtrack to the team’s recent European success under Jürgen Klopp. In Madrid, on the afternoon of the 2019 Champions League final, Webster performed it to 50,000 people. (Klopp conveyed his pride: “The world is wide open for you.”) Even before We Get By reached No 6 in the mainstream album chart in August, the Liverpool Echo had named Webster the 11th most-influential Merseysider in its 2020 Power List. His move into original songwriting has seen him pegged as a fresh new voice of the city. This Place, a pints-in-the-air ode to his home town, has been streamed more than 1m times on Spotify after it was used in an emotive montage by Sky Sports the night in July that Liverpool lifted the Premier League trophy. “People tell me it brought them to tears,” he says, sounding slightly embarrassed. “But I want my music to connect with people.” We Get By channels a similarly communal spirit. Webster’s acoustic-led, anthemic songs depict what he calls “the quirks” of working-class life: messy weekends, casual fashion, dead-end jobs and unpaid bills. And thus he rejects any suggestion that his music isn’t really folk: he says his chronicling of people’s experiences, like his hero Bob Dylan, belongs in the genre’s lineage. “I agree it’s not traditional folk,” he says, “it’s modern folk. Folk has been around for centuries, passing down stories from generation to generation that give you a certain outlook on life. My album documents the struggles, joys and escapes of working-class life – if that’s not folk then what is? Just because I don’t have a harmonica or wear a trilby doesn’t mean I can’t be put into that bracket.” We’ve been fed so many lies and subject to so many failed experiments this year, frustration is starting to build Webster joins the Scottish grassroots sensation Gerry Cinnamon in expanding traditional definitions of folk. (In his covers era, Webster used to perform Cinnamon’s material.) Mark Radcliffe, presenter of BBC Radio 2’s The Folk show, says: “Arguments about what is and isn’t folk are not a new thing. There are always those that want to protect the old traditions. But it’s a broad genre, and Jamie has shown folk can be a very independent endeavour. The idea of traditional folk can sometimes put people off, as it can be a hard listen. He’s making it accessible to people who probably never thought of themselves as folk fans.” Webster sees his football fandom as an extension of his folk credentials. “Match-going culture is like folk,” he says. “The camaraderie, stories, songs. I learned how to sing in the crowd. Most of my mates are tone deaf, but when we’re stood together singing a football song it sounds perfectly in key.” It made the moment Allez Allez Allez first reached the terraces all the more extraordinary. “I was like, job done. I’ve finally learnt how to get a song to the masses. It’s like my Wonderwall.” Boss, a live album of Webster singing football songs, is also in the folk chart Top 10. “I like the fact there is an album on the folk chart associated with football,” says Radcliffe. “At one time, football was seen as the game of the working man and woman. Lowry used to paint football matches as it’s such a part of working-class life.” Webster’s work retains a spiky Liverpudlian edge: “Sick and tired of the bad news stories / Sick and tired of the crooked Tories,” he sings on Something’s Gotta Give. “People tweet that line to me five times a day,” says Webster. It captures the mood of a staunchly leftwing city that has a history of fighting injustice from Thatcher to Hillsborough to austerity. “Defiance is the word. We have a reluctance to lie down and be defeated when we know something’s wrong. It takes guts to stand up and say: ‘No, I’m not having that, and neither are people I represent.’” Webster says trust in the government’s handling of coronavirus all but collapsed when Liverpool became the first UK region to be placed into the controversial tier 3 lockdown. He describes a prevalent mood of cynicism and anger. “We’ve been fed so many lies this year and been subject to so many failed experiments, frustration is starting to build.” While he accuses those in power of deliberately entrenching the north-south divide – (“that’s how they ultimately win, with divide and conquer”) he thinks society’s true dividing line is class. “If you’re a working-class lad from Bethnal Green you’ve got the same struggles and dreams as a working-class lad from Liverpool,” says Webster. “It’s only the accent that’s different. And with my music, I want to bring us all together. I want to open people’s eyes to what’s going on.”