Jogging bottoms have been the unforeseen wardrobe hit of 2020. They got us all through lockdown and now we are reluctant to relinquish their comfort. Here’s our guide to get the best pair for you, with styling suggestions for work and leisure. The key is to find a style that suits you. If you are short in the leg opt for a tapered pair without an elasticated cuff, like Reiss’s needlecord joggers. These can be rolled up as required. If you are petite, go for a fitted waist without pleating as that creates an excess of bulky fabric. Try Paige, J Brand and River Island. Also worth considering is Sweaty Betty’s Gary Luxe, as they come in short and regular lengths. Keep footwear the same colour to draw the eye down. If you are long in the body, a high waist will balance your figure. Consider French Connection, or Serena Bute’s silky, flowing styles. For a curvy silhouette, try Asos and Karen Millen’s curve ranges. Swap jersey for satin to elevate your look. The Arkin by J Brand, and Me and Em’s espresso pair are super-slick. Be bold and choose a print. Hush does camo and leopard options, as does Anthropologie. Zara has faux leather in three shades, including a deep red that’ll work for socially distanced drinks. For full partywear Pinko has a pair with all-over gold sequins and Wyse London has launched Ath-Disco lurex and stripe styles. A long-line double-breasted blazer neatens your look. Layer it over a T-shirt, skinny rollneck or silk blouse for business meetings (IRL or Zoom). Or go utilitarian and wear your joggers with a chunky knitted rollneck or cardigan, and finish with a cross-body bag to break the line around your body. If you are tall, try the boyfriend slouchy, relaxed look – layer your sweatpants and knit under an oversized coat and finish with trainers, as seen on the Balenciaga catwalk. Dress up your joggers with a pointed high court shoe in a metallic or a leopard print. Styling the look with a smart blazer or coat and a chandelier earring will make your sweatpants evening appropriate. For a dress-down weekend look, choose flat boots, from a chunky walking style to a military lace-up. A fresh white trainer is a failsafe option for a smart casual work look or alternatively opt for a neat ankle boot with a block heel.