Fearful of a second lockdown and having worked my way in recent years through most of the spicy water-cooler British television series – your Broadchurches, your Doctor Fosters – I decided lately to get into The Fall, now available on Netflix. It seems I’m not the only one – since it became available on the streaming service, it has been a constant presence in the Top 10. In The Fall’s favour, it did what I wanted it to, which was to compel me so thoroughly that I wasn’t tempted to scroll through the news as I watched. On the other hand, it made me so acutely anxious that I was doing a little jig of horror at the end of the first episode, and humming loudly to stop my empty flat feeling so bristlingly malign. The Fall, in case you missed it the first time round in 2013, follows Paul Spector, AKA the Belfast Strangler (Jamie Dornan), who divides his time between being an unremarkable if dazzlingly handsome family man and a Nietzsche-spouting methodical killer of women. Gillian Anderson plays DI Stella Gibson, brought over from the Met to work the case with a ceaseless carousel of seductive silk blouses and a permanently arched eyebrow. Spector precedes his killings by prowling the homes of his victims, taking tokens and subtly rearranging their objects to mildly disorient them. His targets are single professional women in their 30s who live alone, ticking all my personal demographic boxes and meaning I end each episode by checking behind the shower curtain and under my bed. People sometimes speak about how curtailed women’s personal freedoms are compared with those of men; women who have never gone on holiday alone or walked home after dark. Without denying that this is a widespread reality, I’ve never stopped myself from doing anything much, even the somewhat stupid things – the things you’d cut out of a woman’s life if you were performing an objective risk assessment. I’m not stating this to make myself sound brave or to suggest that I’ve had unusual good luck. I’ve been the victim of a certain amount of male violence; whether an excessive amount, I have no idea. But even those incidents – which were out of the blue and committed by people I didn’t know with no warning – didn’t really make me change my behaviour. This wasn’t a conscious rebuttal to the facts of what happened, but maybe it was a subliminal response. I was aware of how illogical the whole business is, and how arbitrary the rules are of who gets hurt and why. I felt there was no way of changing my behaviour that would lessen my risk substantially enough to make the sacrifices worth it. The Fall, though, manages to induce a rather uncharacteristic anxiety about my aloneness and my femaleness. A friend, another woman in her 30s living by herself, responded sardonically when I spoke about this: “It’s about how we live our lives wrong.” And, indeed, it is impossible to watch without feeling as if you are being lectured in an almost comically heavy-handed and portentous manner. The window ajar, the bedside vibrator, no husband in bed to ward off the evil when it comes. The gaze of the show also feels strikingly aroused by the lead up to the violence it portrays; horny for the next murder or the next weird thing Spector is going to do to his teenage babysitter, Katie, who is sexually obsessed with him. In its icky ability to make you see part of the killer’s perspective and the victim’s, it brought to my mind the Netflix show Unbelievable. That was another story of women being attacked during home invasion, and another that induces a visceral physical reaction. The notable difference in the two depictions, released six years apart, is that Unbelievable is intentionally shot and produced in such a way as to mimic the trauma reaction of the victim – the unwelcome repetitive recurrence of images, the inability of a compromised brain to present a coherent narrative. In The Fall, on the other hand, we are led to feel as Spector feels when he prepares to kill. I can see that efforts were made to counteract the relish with which we see women being hurt. Stella doles out warnings to policemen not to judge a woman who has been attacked for being active on a sex-seeking site, and she sticks up for her own right to have one-night stands – but the point is that I can see the efforts. They are foisted on us with inelegant and visible intention, and then the fact remains that the woman who used the sex site was attacked by a psychopath, that Stella’s one-night stand was shot down in the street the day after he shagged her and Stella ends up in the papers with big red letters across her chest because of her slatternly behaviour. No act of freedom goes unpunished. When faced with accusations of misogyny, creators of crime dramas or true crime often say that it’s important to represent the reality of how pervasive male violence against women is. God knows I consume enough of the stuff that I have no high horse to climb on. But despite the great acting and the lip service paid to feminism and the classiness of the production values, what you feel when watching the hunted women in The Fall is not some moral and removed disgust, but a very real and potent physical excitement. When I watch, I am nauseous and excited in the way that having an affair or getting away with a lie feels nauseating and exciting. Seeing women who are like me, who live like me, get killed for their foolish independence; watching the camera love it, lavish it with erotic enjoyment. It feels undeniably compelling, it feels good even, but the kind of good it is to press your tongue against the raw exposed fissures of a torn-out tooth, knowing you shouldn’t, that it will hurt you more, but unable to stop.