The UK death toll from coronavirus rose by 241 on Tuesday – the highest daily reported rise since the first wave of the pandemic. While the Tuesday total is often larger because of a delay in reporting deaths over the weekend, this week’s is nevertheless the highest figure since 5 June. Last month, the government’s chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance, warned the UK was on course for 200 deaths a day by mid-November. The latest daily total suggests the deadly impact of the virus is running ahead of his prediction. The government’s official coronavirus death toll for the UK since the pandemic began is now 43,967. Separate figures compiled by the UK’s statistics agencies show there have now been 58,164 deaths registered in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate. The government toll is based on people who died within 28 days of a first positive test result for coronavirus. The government said, as of 9am on Tuesday, there had been a further 21,330 lab-confirmed cases of Covid in the UK, bringing the total number to 762,542. Vallance had suggested there could be 50,000 cases a day by mid-October. Dr Yvonne Doyle, the medical director of Public Health England, said: “The trend in deaths is rising sharply. Tragically we know that older people and those with underlying health conditions tend to suffer more if they become unwell. We all have a responsibility to follow the restrictions to help stop the virus spreading to those who are at greater risk. “The measures across the country are there to reduce transmission of the virus, which is why it is essential that we all follow them. We know that the easiest and best way to protect each other is to regularly wash our hands, wear a face covering when required and to keep space from each other.” On Saturday, new restrictions came into force imposing further curbs on more than half the population of England in an attempt to halt the renewed spread of the virus. On Friday, Northern Ireland closed schools, pubs and restaurants in a set of new restrictions to last four weeks, with the exception of schools, which will shut for two weeks. Scotland introduced new rules for the hospitality sector on Friday, while Wales will enter a two-week “firebreak” lockdown from this Friday.