The Premier League and the English Football League are in open conflict after plans advocating fundamental reform of the game were made public. Project Big Picture is the name given to a proposal devised by Liverpool and Manchester United but, crucially, approved by the Football League in which big clubs would get control over the running of the top flight in return for redistributing greater funding down the football pyramid. The EFL chairman, Rick Parry, has publicly endorsed what he calls “a great idea” – one that would involve Football League clubs taking 25% of future Premier League deals and the end of parachute payments. These changes would be accompanied by further reforms shrinking the Premier League to 18 places, ending the Carabao Cup and giving the nine longest-serving top-flight clubs preferential votes. The Premier League was excoriating in its criticism of the plan and of Parry, the division’s first chief executive. With 14 of the 20 top-flight clubs unaware of Project Big Picture before it was leaked to the Daily Telegraph, the league said the plan could have “a damaging impact on the whole game” and called for it to be discussed via “the proper channels”. Publicly the league expressed “disappointment” with Parry’s public involvement in the plan – behind the scenes it is incensed with the action of the EFL chairman. The Premier League, EFL and the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport have been in negotiations for months over a potential £250m bailout of the pyramid in the face of the Covid-19 crisis. What might happen to those talks now is unclear and raising temperatures further, a spokesman for the government on Sunday described Project Big Picture as a “backroom deal” that would “create a closed shop at the very top of the game”. Parry remained unequivocal in his support of the plan. “Project Big Picture provides a new beginning which will revitalise the football pyramid at all levels,” he said. “This new beginning will reinvigorate clubs in the lower leagues and the communities in which they are based. “This is about building on what is good and making the most of what works well in order to benefit the game as a whole, while simultaneously tackling those issues which trouble all of us. This is a blueprint for the future of English football and for everyone who cherishes it.” Responding to the government’s intervention, Parry said: “The merits of the idea still shine through. It is absolutely about saving the pyramid. So I frankly find it really difficult to reconcile our thoughts on this with the government’s position. But it’s not going to deter us.” Discussions over ideas similar to those revealed have been going on for some time between Parry and the Premier League’s top clubs – in particular the Liverpool owner, John W Henry, and Joel Glazer, the Manchester United chairman. The deal eventually agreed comprises two main components – a significant increase in financial solidarity from the top flight to the lower leagues and a substantial reform of governance in the Premier League. Under Project Big Picture, the Premier League would give the EFL the £250m bailout requested. The money would be advanced, drawn from a new arrangement in which the EFL would collectively negotiate its broadcast deals with the Premier League. There would also be £100m given to the FA, £55m of it to cover some of the governing body’s coronavirus losses. Once running costs were taken out, the EFL would then take a quarter share of future broadcasting revenues. In return the top flight’s “long-term shareholders” – Liverpool, Manchester City, Manchester United, Chelsea, Tottenham, Arsenal, Everton, Southampton and West Ham – would be afforded voting rights which would enable any six of them to pass and veto certain new rules. This, according to the EFL, would include the ability to approve TV deals and enforce changes to “cost control rules and regulations”. They could also veto proposed new club owners and prevent changes to the current distribution of broadcast revenues. One Premier League club outside the top six is known to have grave reservations about handing so much power to a small number of teams and does not believe the plan will get the minimum 14 votes required to pass. It would be particularly concerned at the big clubs’ ability to potentially control the split of broadcast revenues. At least the nine “long-term shareholders” could be expected to offer their backing in a vote. Parry admitted the plans would not offer any safeguard against big clubs changing deals in future to suit their own best interests. “It’s impossible to set anything in stone for ever. But that is absolutely not a reason for not doing the right thing now. The message from Liverpool and Manchester United and their ownership is that they actually do genuinely care about the pyramid. I know that they do, because this hasn’t been rushed together. “This is genuinely about power with responsibility. Of course, we’ll look for safeguards. We can’t guarantee it’s going to be in place for ever. But we couldn’t guarantee that when the Premier League was formed and it didn’t do badly for quite a long time.” As tempers rose in line with the stakes, football fans made a plea to be heard. A spokesperson for the Football Supporters’ Association said: “Very few of our members have ever expressed the view that what football really needs is a greater concentration of power in the hands of the big six billionaire-owned clubs.”