Former football coach and serial paedophile Barry Bennell has been jailed for an additional four years as he was sentenced over sexual abuse for a fifth and most likely final time. The 66-year-old former Crewe Alexandra, Manchester City and Stoke City coach, also known as Richard Jones, was sentenced at Chester Crown Court on Thursday after pleading guilty to three counts of buggery and six counts of indecent assault against two boys at an earlier hearing. The offences happened between 1979 and 1988 when the victims were aged between 11 and 14. The court heard it would be the final prosecution against Bennell, who will not leave prison until he is at least in his 80s. More than 100 victims are believed to have come forward to allege they were abused by the paedophile, who has now been convicted of sexual abuse against 22 boys.Former Manchester City youth player Gary Cliffe, who Bennell was convicted of abusing in 2018, said the justice system was “inept” at dealing with cases on that scale. Speaking outside court, he said he was “devastated” for those who had come forward with allegations which Bennell would not be charged with.“We need to have a conversation about mass reporting and how every person gets their day in court.” The Offside Trust, set up by survivors of child sexual abuse in sport, said it was “delighted that more survivors have seen justice done today” but criticised the decision to end prosecutions. “The decision not to bring the dozens of other outstanding cases to court is a bitter blow to so many men and their families. We share their anger, disappointment and pain.”Detective Inspector Sarah Oliver said Cheshire Police had investigated complaints from dozens of alleged victims in the biggest investigation of its type the force had ever seen. She told the PA news agency: “It was a difficult process. Anyone who has been a victim of child sexual abuse does deserve to have their day in court, they do deserve justice, but because of the number of individuals Barry Bennell abused that has just not been possible in this particular case. I hope that they can see this as a vicarious justice.” Bennell, wearing a purple jumper, appeared via videolink from HMP Littlehey in Cambridgeshire, where he is serving a 30-year sentence after being convicted of 52 child sexual offences against 12 boys in 2018. Bennell abused his victims while they were staying at his homes in Crewe and Furness Vale, Derbyshire, as well as at children’s home Taxal Edge, the court was told. Judge Patrick Thompson told Bennell: “These were children whose parents trusted and respected you, when you were in fact a parent’s worst nightmare. That, I’m afraid, is your legacy and changing your name will not change that.” He added: “Whilst the complainants may not have achieved their dreams of becoming sporting heroes, they are heroes nonetheless.” He sentenced Bennell to an additional four years in prison and an additional year on licence, making his total jail sentence 34 years with a further two years on licence. The court heard Bennell had a detached retina after being attacked in prison and was in remission from cancer. Bennell was first jailed in Florida in 1994 for raping a British boy on a football tour in America, before going on to face prison sentences in Britain in 1998, 2015 and in 2018. Eleanor Laws QC, defending, said Bennell had already been sentenced to a total of 49 years. She said Bennell had undergone an “intensive rehabilitation programme” while in prison in America and had not offended for 25 years. Owen Edwards, prosecuting, said Bennell was instrumental in forging the careers of several international footballers but was also responsible for “industrial sexual abuse of boys”.