A person with knowledge of the situation says Tyronn Lue has agreed to become the next coach of the Los Angeles Clippers. Final terms were still being worked on, said the person who spoke to the Associated Press Thursday on condition of anonymity because no contract had been signed. Lue will replace Doc Rivers, who had coached the Clippers for the last seven seasons. Lue was on Rivers’ staff this season when the Clippers wasted a 3-1 lead over Denver and lost in the Western Conference semi-finals. ESPN first reported the agreement between Lue and the Clippers, saying it was a five-year deal. Lue went 128-83 in parts of four seasons as coach of the Cleveland Cavaliers, taking over at the midpoint of the 2015-16 season and leading them to their first NBA title. He left the Cavs after six games of the 2018-19 season. That 2016 title team had LeBron James – who just led the Los Angeles Lakers to the 2020 NBA title. Lue also was a candidate for other jobs this offseason, including in Houston and New Orleans. The Clippers– in the first season of Kawhi Leonard and Paul George playing together – went 49-23 this regular season, the fourth-best record in franchise history. Earlier Thursday, the AP reported Houston Rockets general manager Daryl Morey is stepping down on his own accord, citing a person familiar with the decision. The person spoke on condition of anonymity Thursday because the move hasn’t been announced. It was first reported by ESPN. The Rockets have made the playoffs 10 times since Morey was hired in 2007, including the last eight seasons. Morey was responsible for the blockbuster trade that brought James Harden to Houston from Oklahoma City. The Rockets reached the Western Conference finals twice under Morey but were unable to win their first championship since the team captured consecutive titles in 1994-95. The move comes after coach Mike D’Antoni told the team he would not return after the Rockets lost to the Lakers in the conference semi-finals. Morey caused an international uproar last year when he tweeted support for anti-government protesters in Hong Kong. Morey tweeted an image that said: “Fight For Freedom. Stand With Hong Kong.” His tweet was in reference to pro-democracy demonstrations in the semiautonomous Chinese territory that had been mired in escalating violence between protesters and law enforcement. The tweet caused businesses in China to cut ties with the Rockets and broadcasters there refused to air the team’s games this season. NBA telecasts in China, however, resumed during the recent NBA finals.