The long-running kids’ current affairs staple presents this two-part documentary special reporting on the lived experiences of black teenagers growing up in the UK. We follow three young people – Isaiah (13), Mandi (13) and Zionne (14) – as they share whether they feel their lives are any different to those of their parents before meeting their famous idols, such as Lewis Hamilton, and putting together a manifesto for making life better for black British kids in the future. Ammar Kalia To Bromsgrove in Worcestershire, where the grown-up children of Karen and John have raised the alarm about the way grief and caring responsibilities have impacted on their parents’ eating habits. Gregg Wallace and Chris Bavin arrive to get them to fall in love with home cooking again, and turn away from the ready meals and takeaways. Jack Seale The extreme makeover show heads for Streatham, south London to cast a disapproving eye over Matt and Kevin’s rather clapped-out looking 1930s gaff, an angular, gloomy carbuncle with a roomy back garden. A huge concrete extension could be transformative – but how much time (and cash) will it take? Graeme Virtue The nation has been wincing at Alan Sugar’s business eliminator for 15 years now. So in these tricky times for new TV, it’s ripe for repurposing. Prepare to feel nostalgic for Nick and Margaret, agog at the awfulness of most of the contestants and curious about how many of the winners remain in business. Phil Harrison The second episode of this talking heads docuseries finds Trump settling into his time at the White House – or at least attempting to, as porn performer Stormy Daniels’ allegations against him come to light and the Mueller inquiry into Russian interference threatens to derail his presidency. AK Greg Davies and his sidekick Alex Horne continue the tormenting of their celebrity competitors Daisy May Cooper, Johnny Vegas, Katherine Parkinson, Mawaan Rizwan and Richard Herring. This week, Vegas mounts an umpire’s chair and shouts for 20 minutes, while the others go on a treasure hunt. AK Hidden Figures, 9pm, Film 4 Three brilliant young black women gatecrash the all-white, mainly male club that is 1960s Nasa – and what fun they have doing it. Taraji P Henson, Octavia Spencer and Janelle Monáe are the scientists who navigate past sneery colleague Kirsten Dunst to blast John Glenn into space. Paul Howlett European Tour Golf: The Italian Open 11.30am, Sky Sports Main Event. Day one from San Vigilio di Pozzolengo in Brescia. Rugby League: Huddersfield Giants v Wakefield Trinity 7.45pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Super League clash. Uefa Europa League Football: Dundalk v Molde 5.45pm, BT Sport 1. Sparta Prague v Lille at 8pm.