Born in London, Samuel West, 54, was cast as Leonard Bast in Merchant Ivory’s 1992 film adaptation of Howards End. On stage he played Hamlet for the RSC in 2001. His latest TV role is Siegfried Farnon in Channel 5’s remake of All Creatures Great and Small. He has two children with playwright Laura Wade and lives in London. What is your greatest fear?Not dying before my children. Which living person do you most admire and why?Greta Thunberg. For setting an example and fighting hatred with humour. What is the trait you most deplore in yourself?Procrastination. What is the trait you most deplore in others?Hypocrisy. What was your most embarrassing moment?I once introduced myself to my own cousin backstage. What is your most treasured possession?A velvet pincushion in the shape of an aubergine, bought in New York in 1992. What would your superpower be?I’d like to have no bodily odour. What do you most dislike about your appearance?Having to care about it more than I’d like, because of the job I do. If you could bring something extinct back to life, what would you choose?Socialism. Is it better to give or to receive?To give – then you don’t have to find somewhere to put the damn thing. Who would play you in the film of your life?Me, I hope. But I probably wouldn’t get an audition. What is your most unappealing habit?Picking my nose and wiping it on car seats. What did you want to be when you were growing up?A DJ. I still do. What is the worst thing anyone’s ever said to you?“You’ll never be a DJ.” What is your guiltiest pleasure?A three-pack of Walnut Whips. What was the best kiss of your life?Julia Roberts in Notting Hill, but they cut it. If you could edit your past, what would you change?I’d have done everything earlier and with more style. If you could go back in time, where would you go?To see the first performance of Hamlet in 1600 or so. How do you relax?Watching birds. What single thing would improve the quality of your life?Decent arts funding. What keeps you awake at night?Laura Wade. How would you like to be remembered?As someone who gave it a go. What is the most important lesson life has taught you?Parenthood is gardening not carpentry. Where would you most like to be right now?Watching a play with a lot of strangers.