Sarah Hall has become the first writer to win the BBC national short story award twice, with judges describing her as a virtuoso of the form. Hall, who previously took the £15,000 prize in 2013, won the annual competition again on Tuesday night for The Grotesques, a “timeless and unsettling” story that explores privilege, inequality and mother-daughter relationships in a university town. The prize, which is supported by Cambridge University, is initially judged blind. “In perhaps the strongest field in the history of the award, Hall’s story still stood out,” said chair of judges and Guardian journalist Jonathan Freedland. “A timeless, unsettling story rendered in exquisite prose, The Grotesques yields more with each reading, offering layer upon layer of meaning. It is the work of a writer who is not only devotedly committed to the short story genre but has become a master of it.” Hall, who beat writers including Eley Williams and Jan Carson to win the award, is “this country’s foremost writer of short stories”, said Freedland. Hall, who has also twice been nominated for the Booker prize for her novels, has said in the past that short stories are harder to write. “When you are limited to that kind of word count, it can be very hard,” she told the Observer in 2017. “It is a place for dark psychology and a potent literary dosage. When I start out it usually stems from a thought, or something I heard in the news that gives me a shape. I like reading stories that give you a huge wallop, one you don’t see on the surface. I don’t like squibs.” On Tuesday, Hall said she was “stunned” to have won. “No one expects to repeat a shortlisting, let alone be honoured with an award like this twice. It’s an incredible privilege and reward,” she said. BBC Audio books editor Di Speirs, who has judged the short story prize since its launch, said there were few authors who make even the shortlist for the award more than once; Hall has been shortlisted four times. “To keep writing really excellent short stories requires audacity, invention and practice. So I’m particularly delighted that, from a brilliant shortlist, Sarah Hall, a virtuoso in this field, sees her long service in the short story game recognised again,” Speirs said. Freedland and Speirs were joined on the judging panel by the writers Lucy Caldwell, Irenosen Okojie and Chris Power. If she’d been someone else, the prank might have seemed funny. The vagrant Charlie-bo, who was quite famous around town, a kind of filthy savant, was lying on his back in his usual spot under the shop awning. He was asleep or passed out. Perhaps he was even dead, Dilly couldn’t tell. A mask of fruit and vegetables had been arranged over his face to create another awful face. Lemons for eyes – the pupils drawn in black marker pen. A leering banana smile. Corncobs were stacked round his head as a spray of wild hair. The nose – how had they done it? – was an upright slice of melon, carved, balanced, its orange flesh drying and dulling. It was all horribly artistic. Dilly stood close by, staring. The face was monstrous and absurd, like one of the paintings in the Fitzwilliam. There was a makeshift palette of newspaper under Charlie-bo, and his feet and hands were upturned and huge. He wore as many layers as a cabbage, and over the holey, furling garments, that enormous grey gown, a cross between a greatcoat and a prophet’s robe, tied with a pleated cord. Dilly hadn’t meant to stop; she was late getting home with Mummy’s shopping. But the scene was too terrible. People were walking past, bustling around her. Some were making unkind comments. Good God, look at the state. There had even been a few laughs, and some clapping, as if this were a street performance. It might have been art, but Charlie-bo hadn’t done this to himself; Dilly knew that. He was so far gone, a wreck of a man, a joke already. He lumbered around town and could barely speak. Often he was prostrate in a doorway, drunk. The prank must have been carried out in daylight – brazenly. She could hear an internal voice, Mummy’s voice: disgraceful, who are these wretches? Students, that was who. They were back after the summer break, spoiled from Mediterranean sailing and expensive capital apartments, or loafing on their estates, whatever they did. There had been several esoteric japes in the city since their return. A Halloween mask and nipple-peep bra had been placed over one of the stone saints outside St Giles. The Corpus Clock had been defaced, its glass shield painted with an obscene image, so the rocking brass insect looked like it was performing a sexual act – having a sexual act performed on it, actually. Edward had seen and reported back to Mummy, who was outraged and still talking about it, even though she had no association with the college, or any of the colleges. Edward had seemed rather amused, but quickly sobered in solidarity. First-term antics. Once the Gowns arrived back, they imperiously reclaimed the town, before settling in and getting on with their studies. Poor Charlie-bo. It was really too much. He wasn’t a statue on a church. Dilly wanted to kneel down and remove the ridiculous fruit, shake him awake, help him to his feet. Perhaps if she did, Charlie-bo would revert to his old self, smile and speak articulately, as he hadn’t for years. He would thank her. Those reddened, free-roaming eyes would hold her gaze, kindly, shyly. Something spiritual would pass, perhaps – a blessing story, like those Father Muturi had preached about last Sunday. Dilly lifted her hand, paused. The lemon pupils were looking right at her. Charlie-bo’s coat was grimy, lined by the dirty tides of the street, and there was a strong, crotchy smell. Silly girl, she heard Mummy say. Don’t be so squeamish. Mummy was right, of course. She usually was. She could immediately detect faults, like recoil and embarrassment, in her children, even if she couldn’t find her own purse or shoe, or she’d lost the car, or a bit of bacon grease was in her hair, making it rear up. Dilly sometimes thought that Mummy was like a truffle pig, rooting around and unearthing ugly, tangled thoughts in people. She especially did not like shame or reticence. You had to stride into a room; wear any dress, day or night, like you were at a gala event; speak to strangers without inhibition. Just have a go, Dilly, for goodness’ sake. Engage! By now, Mummy would have swept the degrading parody face away and helped stand Charlie-bo up, with that superhuman little woman’s strength of hers. Even if he were dead, she would have the power to re­surrect him. She would buy him a cup of tea in Jarrold’s. Then she’d tell the story, marvellously, afterwards. Dilly put her hand back in her pocket. Without warning, Charlie-bo flinched. He jolted, as if struck by an electrical current. The melon tipped over, and a lemon rolled from his eye socket on to the pavement, quite near Dilly’s foot. Charlie-bo grunted, reached up and groped at his head. He looked like someone on the television coming round from an operation, trying to remove tubes. The banana and corncobs fell away and the real face was revealed: discoloured skin with reefs of eczema and cold-burns, a sore, sticky mouth. Charlie-bo kept patting his head, making panicked, bleating noises. His eyes – Dilly hadn’t been this close to him before – were a mad yellowish-green. There were watery cysts in his eyelids. His gaze was trying to find purchase on something. The striped awning. Sky. Her. He sat up. He flailed an arm out, brushed Dilly’s skirt, and blurted a sound that seemed fatty and accusing. Dilly took a step backwards. She shook her head. No, she thought. I wanted to help. Charlie-bo was looking at her, and through her. He made another attempt to speak. His tongue was oversized, a giant grub inside his mouth. She took another step backwards, and a cyclist tinged his bell in warning and flew past. Someone bumped her hard on her thigh with the corner of a shopping bag. Dilly turned and began to walk away. Behind her, she could hear Charlie-bo making loud, obscene noises. She sped up, weaving round pedestrians. He might be up on his feet now, lumbering after her. It wasn’t me, she thought. Please please please. She half-ran towards the punt station and Queen’s Bridge, her heart flurrying. She passed Lillian’s boutique. The door was open and she thought someone said her name, but she kept her head down. Before she turned the corner by the wine merchant, she cast a look behind, expecting to see him, his cloak flying, his face hideous with rage. But Charlie-bo wasn’t there. She came to a stop by the river, feeling woozy with relief. The towpath was quiet, just a few people walking and cycling. She went a little way along and sat on a bench, waited for her nerves to calm. The river was a rich opaque green. Leaves from the chestnut trees had fallen and were riding along on the surface. The river always made her feel better. It would be lovely to walk that way home, the long way round, watch the swans and the glassy fluid sliding over the weir. But she was probably very late now and Mummy would be getting cross. Mummy had only sent Dilly out for a few items – teabags, cream, jam. It had taken a long time to decide on the jam. Dilly couldn’t remember if Mummy had asked for a particular kind, and she’d begun to fixate on the seeds in the raspberry jam jar. They’d seemed like a million prickly eyes. People were coming over to the house for a little get-together that afternoon – it was Dilly’s birthday, actually, though the fact kept slipping her mind. Father Muturi, who was Mummy’s favourite priest at St Eligius, was coming, and Cleo and Dominic, of course, possibly Peter if he finished work in time, not Rebecca, obviously, though Dilly still sometimes forgot, and a lady was coming who could perhaps help Dilly get a job at a magazine, on the arts column. Dilly had wanted to ask Sam, but it was beginning to look like Sam didn’t meet with anyone’s approval. He’d been a bit too quiet at the dinner last week, and hadn’t wanted to sing when Mummy had asked him to. When Dilly had sung her number, a northern sea shanty, which she’d performed nicely but with the usual mild mortification, Sam had looked suddenly very frightened. He hadn’t replied to Dilly’s last three messages. And he hadn’t been to their French evening class this week. Mummy was making scones for the tea party, which was quite a production; things would be getting tense at home, even though scones, as far as Dilly could tell, were not very difficult to make. She should really go. Get on, Dilly! She should be thinking of interesting things to say to the lady from the arts magazine, and sorting her face out. But the river was so smooth and lovely. It felt very receptive. She’d walked along it with Rebecca in the summer, on a very hot day, and had tried to say kind things. She’d said that, as Peter’s little sister, she knew him as well as anyone did, and, even if he seemed a bit other, she was sure he did care. It wasn’t a disloyal thing to say, she’d hoped. Rebecca had been crying on the walk, silently, her face was soaked, her unwashed hair pulled back under a headband, and she hadn’t replied. Rebecca had cried a lot last summer, because of the baby. And because of Peter, though Mummy maintained Peter had done nothing wrong, that he couldn’t take leave from work willy-nilly, and that Rebecca had been crying to a worrying degree and might be becoming a rather difficult character. It was hard to know what to think about it. Or feel about it. Dilly had written a few letters to Rebecca, but had thrown them away. It couldn’t be spoken about, unless raised by Mummy, and then certain agreements were made. A good party story to tell would have been how she’d helped Charlie-bo, how she’d intervened, stopped the ridicule. It was so hard to make yourself the hero of your stories, be witty but still seem humble – Mummy and Cleo were masters at that kind of thing. Dilly looked downstream. It was the usual scene. Houseboats with bicycles mounted on their sides. Joggers. The metal bridge – Sorrell’s – the only ugly bridge in the city. There were some newly built houses with chalet-style balconies that Edward liked. Who lived there, she wondered. Different people. The common opened out, and the river trickled away to nothing on the horizon. She became aware of a light rain falling. Her skirt was damp and the towpath now had a leaden sheen. The swans were tucked away, heads under their wings, holding so still in the current they could be pegged underwater. She’d forgotten to take an umbrella from the house, of course. Her hair was difficult if the rain got it for too long, unmanageable, which would be a problem later. She stood and began to walk back towards the punt station. The drops were already getting heavy; she could feel them trickling on her forehead and round her eyebrows. The punts were parked in a row, hooded and chained. Four or five people were looking over the edge on the bank opposite, up above the weir. One person was pointing. Something was probably caught in the froth at the bottom of the water’s curtain. It was one of Mummy’s peeves, all the junk being tossed into the river – riparian fly-tipping, she called it. Suitcases, bin bags, toasters. Almost as bad as the uncleared dog mess and barbecue scorches on The Green. Dilly didn’t have time to stop and look. She turned, walked over Queen’s Bridge and continued up the road, past the charity shop, which always had lovely blouses on its mannequins, past The Blue Bell, towards Monns Patisserie. Monns was very difficult. There was a kind of pastel, underworld glory to the window. The cakes were tormentingly delicious, with such delicate architecture and sugar-spun geometrics, candied fruit, chocolate curls. She often found herself gazing at them and getting lost. It was best not even to look. But she couldn’t help it. Today, the cakes seemed so perfect and beautiful that she began to feel emotional. Her throat hurt. She wanted to sit down on the pavement and hold her knees. She was hungry; that was it. An egg for breakfast was all Mummy had allowed, no toast because Dilly was currently off carbs. Lunch hadn’t seemed to ma­terialise. Instead, there’d been a little debate about what to wear to impress the lady from the magazine. Several skirts were rejected, and there had been a lot of frustration in the room. Mummy and the lady, her name was possibly Marion or Beatrice, had fallen out a few years ago over something written in an article. Now they were friends again. That was not un­common with Mummy’s acquaintances. One of the cakes in Monns seemed to have a waterfall of glittering cocoa powder on its edge, almost hovering, suspended in the air. How had they done that? Perhaps her eyes were blurring in the rain. Do buck up, Dilly. Soon there would be scones, Mummy’s speciality: warm, soft, comforting, with cream and jam. It might be possible to slip an extra one on to her plate unseen. There was an art to second helpings: you had to be confident and move fast, look as if you were helpfully clearing crockery. Dilly wondered if Charlie-bo was hungry. There was the question of alcohol, which might take priority. Of all the homeless people in town, Charlie-bo was best known, cherished even. He’d been a student at the university, studying Heidegger, or the 11th dynamic of space, something very avant garde and awfully difficult. He’d been in contention for a Nobel, people said. Mummy maintained Charlie-bo was from a small northern village, just like her – an un-belonger, a bootstrapping scholarship boy. Too much studying, or a drug trauma, or a stroke – some calamity had done for him, and he’d begun his descent. For a while he’d been a brilliant celebrity of the streets and shelters, until his mind dissolved. A casualty of genius. At least, that was the story. By the time she got to Northumberland Road, Dilly felt wet and dizzy. The rain had done a very thorough job. Her hair stuck to her temples. The bottom door of the house was locked – its key had been missing for a while – which meant she wouldn’t be able to slip in unnoticed. She trudged up the steps to the front door and through the window saw Father Muturi in the lounge, standing at the fireplace and talking to Edward. Father Muturi liked to stand by the fire and say how cold England was. He would say things like African children learned to walk younger because it was warmer there. If Edward had been called down, Dilly was very late. She waited outside for a moment, very close to the front door, perhaps only an inch from it. She could feel her breath against the wood. The smell from her mouth was like pickle. She could see cracks in the red paint. Inside one was the tiniest insect – its legs poking out, awkwardly. She put her hand on the knob. She took it off again. Sometimes doors could seem impossible. Impossible to open. Impossible to walk through. She felt as if she was the door, as if her own body was shut. Her hair was wet and stupid. Her coat was dripping. Lordy! Have you been for a dip at the river club, Dilly? She could hear cars on the street, the squealing brakes of a bicycle as it slowed at the bottom of the hill. Recently, Mummy had arranged a session with Merrick, the psychoanalyst who lived at number 52, to talk about things like this, and give Dilly “a bit of a boost”. You can tell me anything you like, Merrick had said. Anything about anything. It had seemed almost like a riddle, the way he’d said that. Should we start with why you came back from London? Merrick had been wearing terrible socks with orange diamonds on the ankles, perhaps in an ironic way. It was strange seeing him away from Mummy’s parties, where he was usually dancing, or flirting with Cleo. His practice was in the basement of his own house, and Dilly could see the shoes and legs of people walking past on the street above. She even saw the red-tipped, winking underparts of a dog. The furniture wasn’t leather; it was suede, mustard colour. There was a painting on the wall that was abstract but looked like a woman with a whirlpool in her stomach. Was it supposed to look that way, Dilly had wondered, or did it look like different things to different people? Was it, in fact, a kind of test? Dilly had prepared things to say to Merrick, all very carefully thought through, but she hadn’t said much in the end. After my bag was stolen, I didn’t feel very safe in London. The truth was, no single cataclysmic incident had occurred. It was more a series of daily stumbles, problems she couldn’t solve alone. The forgetting of meals, not forgetting exactly but being defeated by so many options, and rent payments, not making the milk convert to perfect, solid foam in the cafe where she worked. Merrick had looked rather sceptical and bored for most of the hour, then, towards the end, disappointed. He’d finished the session with a little talk about boundaries and identity within a family, he’d used a fishing-net metaphor, and Dilly had felt uncomfortable and was glad when it was over. Mummy hadn’t asked her about the session. The rain was coming down, pattering, darkening the pavement. She would be spied any moment, by Edward or Father Muturi. The scones couldn’t be served until the jam and cream, which were in the bottom of Dilly’s bag, had been delivered. Mummy liked Dilly to make up the tea tray for guests, using the Minton set. Dilly couldn’t exactly explain her lateness; she never could. It was, it would be, more a question of absorbing the annoyance. Letting Mummy’s words come into her without feeling them. One possibility was to tell the Charlie-bo story; somehow amend it and seem less uninvolved. If she told it interestingly, earnestly, with the beautiful sneer and radio tone of Cleo, or with something approximating Mummy’s comedic affront, that might be good enough. She might hold the room. She would, of course, be asked about her level of activity. Didn’t you do anything, Dilly, for goodness’ sake? Perhaps she could say she had done something. Mummy would. Mummy could change a story or revise history with astonishing audacity, and seemed to instantly believe the new version. Edward was waving at her through the window, mouthing door’s unlocked, which of course it always was, even when they all went off on holiday. She pushed it and stepped into the hallway. There were voices in the lounge, Edward’s affable small talk, and Father Muturi’s lovely Kenyan laugh. I just need to take these, she called. She heeled off her boots and went very quietly downstairs to the kitchen. Ghost steps: she was an expert. From the kitchen came the gorgeous, golden smell of baking. The table was in chaos, bowls of spilling flour and dribbling eggshells, some lilies still wrapped in plastic dumped in a jug. The tea tray was not set up. Mummy was turned away, bent over the open oven. There was a white handprint of flour on her skirt. She had on fishnet tights and heels, which meant Dilly would have to find a pair of heels too. The scone smell was almost unbearable. She was so hungry. If she could have just an apple before trying to make polite conversation with the lady from the arts magazine, things might be OK. But the fruit bowl was empty except for a glove. Mummy was naturally slight and trim. Her children were all taller and heavier, like their father with broad Dutch genes, and their intake had to be watched. Daughters, anyway. Peter and Dominic were allowed to finish the roast when they were home, then play tennis afterwards to work it off, while the girls cleared up. The oven fan was whirring. Classical music was playing on the stereo. Mummy hadn’t noticed Dilly; she was busy flapping the scones with a tea towel. Her hair was spilling from its blonde nest. Dilly put her bag quietly down on the table, removed the jam and cream. She placed them behind the flower jug, where it might seem they’d been sitting innocently for an hour, then backed out of the kitchen. She ran upstairs, past the hall mirror – yes, she looked a mess, mascara smudged, lips pale, drowned-cat hair – up to the second floor and into the bathroom. She shut the door, moved the linen basket in front of it. She looked in the bathroom cabinet for a volumiser, some kind of lacquering spray. There was a box of half-used hair dye, magazine sample sachets of face cream, Edward’s cologne and an old splayed toothbrush. Nothing helpful. Below, the doorbell rang. More party guests arriving, probably, though there were always people coming and going for other reasons. She half-expected to hear Mummy’s voice calling up – Door, Dill-eee – as if Mummy might sense, might even see, somehow, that she was home. Dilly picked a towel up off the floor, sat on the toilet lid, and rubbed her hair. There was a comb in the bathtub and she scraped it through her fringe, tried to create something chic to one side of her head. She was sure she had a nice lipstick somewhere, a dark, sophisticated red, given to her by Cleo, who was always being sent free cosmetics. It had come in a little metallic sack, and was called something strange that didn’t suggest colour at all, but a mood, a state of fortune. Advantage. Ascent. She sat for a while thinking, but couldn’t remember the name. The lounge was extremely warm when Dilly went in. A furnace of coal glowed in the fire’s cradle. There was simmering laughter and conversation, the gentle clanking of cups on saucers. Everyone had arrived: Cleo, Dominic and his wife, Bella, Peter, who was in his officer’s uniform, the magazine lady, or at least an unknown lady in a black dress, and some of Mummy’s other friends. Dilly tried to enter the room with a combination of subtle grace and moderate drama, to be seen and perhaps admired, but also pass into the throng without much notice or comment. Mummy was beside the table pouring tea into cups on saucers held out by Bella. Bella was very good at helping, and she seemed to have doubled her efforts since Rebecca. Mummy had on a little blonde fur stole and a black cardigan. There was still a faint white flour mark on her skirt. Next to the tea tray sat a plate of perfect, mounded, bronzed scones. The jam and cream had evidently been found and were set out in matching bowls. Dilly was desperate for a scone, but Mummy was right there, so she moved towards Edward, who, more often than not, would give up his plate if he saw a lady without. As she was making her way round the perimeter of the group, Cleo turned and took hold of Dilly’s elbow. If it isn’t the mystery birthday girl, she said. What have you been up to? Spying for the government? She kissed Dilly on the cheek. Cleo smelled heavenly, some kind of antique French talcum, or a salon-grade shampoo. Her hair, tresses and tresses of it, was piled high. She had on a silky maroon item, not a dress, nor a jumper; it draped perfectly from her shoulders and was belted at her waist. Her face was dewy, flawless. Goodness, you do look beautiful, Dilly, what a fabulous combination, very laissez-faire. Dilly had put together long, wide suit trousers on loan from Lillian’s shop, part of the new winter range, and a pink silk shirt rifled from Edward’s cupboard. In her haste to get ready, the combination had seemed a stroke of casual sartorial humour. But when Cleo gave compliments, you could never quite be sure whether there wasn’t another message. Cleo lowered her voice, conspiratorially. Just a moment, there’s a tiny bit. She raised her top lip and pointed to her front teeth. Cleo’s teeth were slightly gapped, making her somehow seem both sexual and childlike. Dilly licked around to remove the lipstick. Thanks. Cleo tutted. Bit of a dull crew this afternoon, isn’t it? Her mouth rode upwards. She looked like the most beautiful snarling show dog. Shame Sam couldn’t come. But probably it’s not his kind of thing? Let’s say hi to the boys. Cleo linked her arm through Dilly’s and stepped her towards their brothers. Peter and Dominic kissed Dilly on both cheeks and resumed their conversation, which sounded political, something to do with a war in Venezuela. They were disagreeing, amiably. Cleo began a funny anecdote – inserting it elegantly into the discussion – about when she had flown to the wrong airport in Venezuela, the plane landing in a field full of little horses, and getting a lift to Barquisimeto with some chaps who it turned out were not really all that savoury. Peter laughed quietly, uncontrollably; Cleo knew exactly her audience. Dominic looked as if he was gearing up for a story of his own, but he probably knew it wouldn’t compete. The four Quinn siblings, standing together in a group. For a few nice moments, it felt to Dilly like a completed puzzle. It hadn’t felt that way for a while, not since things with Rebecca, which Mummy described as one of the worst things to have happened to the family, her attachment, her over-attachment, to the baby. Some of the words that had been said, by Rebecca when she was very upset, and also by Mummy, afterwards, had echoed in Dilly’s head a long time. Congenital. Abusive. Your son’s twisted priorities and your bloody eugenics – now it’s fine to destroy life? Dilly didn’t know how people could believe in exact opposites where humans were concerned. Mummy could be quite fierce about her sons, but sometimes Peter did need their help, actually, where emotions were concerned. It was awful when things, when people, went wrong. It hadn’t really happened since their father had left, and that had been Mummy’s predominant brown study, until Rebecca. The greatest betrayal of all was to disaffiliate. Dilly’s tummy hurt. There was a sound in her ears that happened when hunger got to a certain stage, a kind of humming generator noise. She could hear Mummy talking loudly, saying something about that naughty Peter not being in a proper jacket, though Mummy quite liked it when Peter arrived at Northumberland Road off-duty, in his kit. Dilly kept her eyes busy and away from the zone where their gazes might meet. In a moment Mummy would probably come over, say something remonstrative, and want to introduce Dilly to the magazine lady. There would be one of those rapid, awkward, whispery interrogations about where Dilly had been, mousing off again, and then she’d have to pretend to be poised and ready for an interview, which wasn’t a proper interview, but a kind of cultural conversation test that might lead to some work, or at the very least to a temporary internship that might lead to some work. Dilly had read the arts section of the papers at the weekend, but couldn’t remember anything interesting. She had half an idea for an article about the colour yellow, how yellow was being reclaimed by women after years of being unfashionable. Also colour therapy, how yellow had a certain effect, psychologically, in relation to mental health. Dilly hadn’t quite worked the proposition out yet, but if she started talking, hopefully things would expand. The room was stuffy and a bit smoky and she felt sick. It was a dangerous point; she knew that from the past. She really did have to eat. She slid out of Cleo’s arm, and went over to Edward and Father Muturi. Father Muturi seemed not to have moved an inch from his warm spot. Cleo, he exclaimed, I was hoping to meet you! Actually, I’m Dilly, Dilly said, that’s Cleo there. She pointed. There was a pause. Ah yes, Delia. Father Muturi turned to Edward. She comes to church a lot, this one. A good girl. Yes, I know, said Edward. That’s a splendid shirt, Dilly. I was thinking of wearing it myself. Edward was smiling, eyes pale and bright behind his glasses. His face was purplish-red, which made his hair look extraordinarily white. He must be cooking inside his wool cardigan. It had taken a little while, but Edward had got used to the borrowing arrangements in the house. Only his brown Belstaff was off-limits. It was very expensive, his favourite coat, and couldn’t be risked, especially as the boys were known to misplace coats a lot. Mummy sometimes teased Edward about it, called it his lucky war corres­pondent’s jacket, but they seemed to have reached an agreement. Father Muturi’s plate was empty on the mantleshelf, but Edward still had half a scone, the bottom piece cut very cleanly, with no scattered crumbs. He hadn’t yet spread anything on top. Dilly willed him to see – to feel – how desperate she was. But Edward seemed slower than usual, or less observant, or perhaps he just assumed Dilly had eaten. Father Muturi was coming to the end of his rotation at St Eligius; he was talking about going home. It would be good to get back to those who really needed him. The English were good citizens, not believers. Well, we shall be very sad to lose you, Edward was saying, though Edward in fact did not attend Mass unless it was Christmas Eve and he’d had a few vodkas. The skin on his face looked so red and shiny it might burst. As she listened to them talk, everything felt very light and thin, and Dilly thought how kind it would be to reach up and prick the surface of Edward’s skin with a pin. Once, twice, on each cheek. There was a pause in the conversation. It’s my birthday, Dilly said. Today. It’s today. The men looked a bit startled. She had blurted it, really quite rudely. Today? Father Muturi said. It’s your birthday? Dilly nodded. She glanced at the hovering scone plate, the beautifully baked half-wing that Edward wasn’t eating. Mummy’s laugh whooped out, she’d told a joke, or someone had. That is very wonderful, Father Muturi said. We must do a birthday blessing. Oh, yes, marvellous, said Edward. Father Muturi cleared his throat noisily, stepped down off the hearth and into the room. He was a big man and when he moved it was seismic. The heads of the guests turned. Father Muturi held out his hands. He waited, professionally, horrifyingly, for attention, and Dilly began to realise what was happening, what was going to happen. One by one the guests fell quiet. Mummy’s voice was the last to ring, its notes high, its key pervasively major. She stepped round the guests and came closer, positioned herself at the front. Theatre at a party was her favourite thing. Father Muturi waggled his fingers a little. Edward had removed himself to the side and Dilly was now, inescapably, the main scene. Everyone’s eyes were on her, Mummy’s especially, a concentrated, avian glare. Dilly tried to smile, to look game, and humble, ready to receive. She glanced at Cleo for help, but her sister was whispering something in Peter’s ear and smirking. Dilly looked down at the floorboards. The dizziness was not airy any more, but heavy, located inside her body. She felt like a weight going down into dark water. In London, she had fainted a few times – low on iron – and been given tablets that tasted nasty and turned everything black. It was quite nice, disappearing for a little while. It would be quite nice now. But, of course, there would be the waking, the being helped up, the fuss, and knowing she had been a spectacle, more of a spectacle than she already was. Father Muturi set his feet wide apart and placed his hands on Dilly’s head. She felt her knees bend and she sank involuntarily. The hands followed her down, made contact again. Dilly tried to stay still. She tried to be present, but it did feel as if she was being towed away. The priest began. On this very special day, this very special girl who God has given . . . He paused. How many years, please? He was asking Dilly, or anyone. Thirty, called Mummy. She’s thirty! Then, as an aside, Lordy, can you believe it, our Dilly! There were a few claps, though why Dilly didn’t know. The pressure of Father Muturi’s touch lifted. He made an um-ing noise, and seemed confused. Dilly shut her eyes, waited. Was this bad? She thought of Charlie-bo. His giant robe-like coat. His ruined hazel eyes. His terrible predicament: not the fruit joke, but his life. She thought of Rebecca, pictured her, fatally, like the painting of the goat in the Fitzwilliam with its red headband, standing in salt near the water, its amber eyes dying. She’d taken Sam to see it a few weeks ago. She’d wanted to tell him that this was what happened when you didn’t belong any more, when you took the sins of others and were cast out. Like Rebecca. Rebecca was a scapegoat. It was a secret, dangerous thought, not ever to be shared with anyone. And Sam hadn’t really been interested in the painting – he’d wanted to see the Samurai masks. Father Muturi touched Dilly’s hair again, gently, firmly, and she thought of the river, the river’s grace and indifference. She felt the river moving past her, its strong, cold muscles. She felt herself going with it. After a moment the priest spoke, issued some kind of blessing, but Dilly couldn’t really hear. When it was over, the guests went back to chatting and laughing and drinking tea. Dilly sat down on the sofa. For a moment, she felt Mummy’s eyes still on her, assessing, but nothing passed between them. Mummy must have sensed, decided not to make the introduction, because Dilly wasn’t hoisted over to the magazine woman. Instead, a cup of tea was handed down to her. And then a plate, bearing a whole, uncut scone, with two glistening heaps, white and red, cream and jam. Around the scone was the faded Minton pattern, a ragged botanical tangle. Dilly felt the corner of one eye dampen. Mummy didn’t say anything, but the relief, the reprieve, was overwhelming. Her hands were trembling a little as she pushed her thumbs into the soft body of the scone and split it open. She took one big piece and swabbed it through the jam and then through the cream; she lifted it and bit into it. The ducts at the back of her mouth stung and saliva flooded out painfully. She almost gagged. Then the taste came, sweet, wheaty, that safe, wonderful, family taste. Merrick had been wrong. She had tried to be unmoored, tried to live without protections, but the world was full of grotesque, frightening, ridiculous things. It was full of meaningless sorrow and contradiction. Like a sick little baby, with a perfect soul. Here – didn’t he see? – they could all help each other. Failure could be forgiven, good things shared. They could all be each other. Who you were, really, was who else you were. It seemed like a miracle to be left alone on the sofa with tea and food, but there she was. The party continued. Dilly ate the scone quickly, a kind of racked, grateful devouring. She licked jam off her finger. She went to the table and took another scone, heaped on cream – no one saw, no one stopped her – and sat back down with her plate. People were talking, sipping tea, having a jolly time, legs and shoes moved here and there. Her brothers and sister and Mummy circulated. The fire began to die. Father Muturi left, maybe for Kenya. He didn’t look at her and he made no goodbyes. The front door closed. A minute later the doorbell rang. Dilly looked up at Mummy to see if she should be the one to answer, but Mummy was already en route, adjusting her pale fur stole. Dilly’s duties, it seemed, were all suspended. She heard a muffled discussion at the door, ladies’ voices, ups and downs, trills of indistinguishable words. It was longer than the usual welcome-and-coat-off conversation, so perhaps not a party guest. Then she heard Mummy exclaim, shrilly, gracious, no! Mummy came back into the lounge with Lillian, who must just have closed the boutique. Lillian was carrying the loveliest-looking package, an immaculate silver box with a huge beige bow, probably for Dilly, because Lillian was very generous and good at remembering. She and Mummy were still talking in low tones, and Dilly heard Mummy say, well, should I announce it? Without waiting for a reply, Mummy said loudly, in her speech-giving voice, everyone. Listen, please, everyone! The room fell quiet again. Mummy’s expression was now the one related to dreadful news and dismay. An almost operatic gurn. Her brow was deeply rippled, mouth collapsing in the corners. Her hands were held to her chest. There’s been an accident. They’ve found, well, a body, it seems, just very close to us, down by the weir. Her eyes were extremely bright; with tears, Dilly realised. Sometimes things did actually make Mummy very upset. There were gasps of surprise and sympathy, and a few comments and questions, awful, who, when, should Peter go and lend a hand? Mummy was drawn back into the group, no, not identified yet, she was saying, expertly, though she’d known the information only since Lillian had arrived. Lillian set the present down on the sofa next to Dilly and perched the other side. She had on the same trousers that Dilly was wearing. The front pleat was perfect. Lillian always looked so beautiful. She smiled. Are you all right, Dilly? Sorry about the bad news. Dilly smiled too and nodded, looked back at the scone on the plate. No Sam today? No, not today. Dilly took another bite. Oh well, never mind. This is nice. Lillian’s voice fell a little. I ran into your dad on the way. He said to say happy birthday. Do you think he’ll pop in? Dilly looked up to see who was left at the party. The magazine lady and Cleo were engrossed in conversation. Peter had disappeared and Dominic was holding a bottle of champagne, unsure whether to open it, while Mummy still seemed preoccupied by the trauma. It was lovely – the wrapping on Lillian’s gift, the people here who really loved her, more than Sam ever would have, the second scone, feeling like giddy deja vu. She already knew everything, could see the body laid out on the towpath, covered by layers and layers of sodden dishevelled rags, a halo of river water leaking around it. The police had cordoned off the scene, and an ambulance was parked up on the road near the punting station. Figures in white medical suits were lifting the yellow tape, stepping underneath, and carefully approaching the lump that had been dragged out of the water. They were kneeling down and gently uncovering the body, peeling off the wet clothes, lifting the heavy wet skirt of the gown away from the face, taking off pieces of rotten fruit, and the red headband, folding back the long, furred ears, and the face underneath, so peaceful and untormented, was hers.