It’s that time of the year when talk turns to whether anyone has any travel plans to look forward to. “Getting away anywhere for half term?” “Any plans for Christmas?” So long as any such travels are denied us, food can be a powerful means of escape. We may not make it to any far-flung places this winter, but, if you can, venture out instead to find some fresh curry leaves, coconut, sweetcorn and aromatics, then return home and turn on the stove. It’s not the real sun, I know: it’s not south-east Asia, it’s not white, sandy beaches, and it sure ain’t Malibu. But the smells and tastes will transport you, so it’s still a journey worth taking. These are great for brunch, but they’ll also work well as a light lunch or dinner. Try experimenting with grapefruit or orange juice in the dipping sauce, instead of the lime. Prep 25 minCook 50 minMakes About 12 For the fritters90g coconut oil3 garlic cloves, peeled and crushed2 green chillies, finely chopped3 spring onions, trimmed and finely chopped2½ tbsp (5g) finely chopped fresh gingerSalt¾ tsp ground turmeric2 tsp lime zest3 eggs120ml full-fat coconut milk350g frozen corn kernels, defrosted and roughly blitzed2 tbsp mixed black and white sesame seeds, toasted For the dipping sauce60ml lime juice2 tbsp mirin (check it’s a gluten-free one, if need be)1 red chilli, very finely chopped2 tsp mint leaves, very finely shredded To serve1 spring onion, trimmed and julienned3 tbsp (10g) mint leaves3 tbsp (10g) coriander leaves Put two tablespoons of the oil in a large, non-stick frying pan on a medium-high heat. Add the garlic, chillies, spring onions, ginger and half a teaspoon of salt, and fry gently, stirring regularly, for eight minutes, until soft and fragrant. Turn off the heat and leave to cool for five minutes. In a large bowl, whisk the turmeric, lime zest, eggs, coconut milk, blitzed corn, sesame seeds and a half-teaspoon of salt until combined, then stir in the cooled spring onion mixture and set aside. For the dipping sauce, mix everything together with a good pinch of salt. Wipe clean the pan and return it to a medium-high heat with two tablespoons of coconut oil. Pour about 65g of batter per fritter into the hot oil, and fry two or three at a time (or as many as will fit without overlapping) for four or five minutes, flipping them once halfway, until nicely browned on both sides. Transfer to a tray and keep warm in a low oven while you repeat with the rest of the batter (top up the oil, if need be, and bring it back up to heat before adding any more of the fritter mix). Arrange the fritters on a platter and serve with the dipping sauce, shredded spring onion, mint and coriander alongside. Serve this smoky, sweet, sour, salty and very versatile salad with white fish, or pile it into a sandwich or wrap. It also works well as a condiment to curry. Prep 15 minCook 30 minServes 4 4 corn cobs, husks removed and discarded60g coconut oil30 fresh curry leaves3 tbsp tinned coconut creamFlaked sea salt1½ tbsp lime juice1½ tbsp (5g) coriander leaves, finely chopped1½ tbsp (5g) chives, finely chopped1 spring onion, trimmed and finely chopped Put a griddle pan on a high heat. Once it’s smoking, lay in the corn and grill, turning it regularly, for about eight minutes, until nicely charred all over. Set aside to cool, then use a sharp knife to shave the kernels into a large bowl. Heat the coconut oil in a large saute pan on a medium-high heat. Once hot, add the curry leaves and fry for 30 seconds, until crisp. Remove the leaves with a slotted spoon and set them aside, then add the coconut cream, charred corn and half a teaspoon of flaked salt to the pan and fry for two minutes. Leave the mixture to cool for five minutes, then add to a bowl with the lime juice, herbs and spring onion, and mix well. Transfer to a platter, top with the crisp curry leaves and serve. I love the combination of corn and coconut in this cake. The crunchy, sweet topping, finished with condensed milk, is also totally irresistible and makes a great sweet treat in its own right. Prep 15 minCook 1 hr 15 minServes 8 For the cake100g unsalted butter, softened at room temperature, plus extra for greasing150g caster sugar2 eggs150g frozen corn kernels, defrosted and roughly blitzed100g desiccated coconut2 tbsp lime zest (from about 4 limes)100g plain flour80g quick-cook polenta120g Greek-style yoghurt½ tsp vanilla bean paste¾ tsp baking powder¾ tsp bicarbonate of soda¼ tsp flaked sea salt For the topping140g dried coconut flakes (aka coconut chips)2 tbsp maple syrup90g condensed milk, plus 3 tbsp extra, to serve½ tsp flaked salt1 tsp lime zest Heat the oven to 190C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Grease and line a 20cm spring-form cake tin. Put the butter and sugar in the bowl of a stand mixer with the paddle attachment in place, then beat for two to three minutes, until light and fluffy. Add all the remaining cake ingredients, beat again until just combined, then spoon into the prepared tin. Bake for 25 minutes, remove from the oven and turn down the heat to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4. Mix the coconut flakes with the maple syrup, condensed milk and salt, making sure the flakes are completely coated, then scatter evenly over the surface of the cake to cover it. Return the cake to the oven for 30 minutes, turning it around once halfway so it cooks evenly, until the coconut flakes are crisp and golden brown. Take out of the oven, leave to cool in the tin for at least half an hour, then unclip the tin and put the cake on a rack to cool completely Just before serving, drizzle over the remaining three tablespoons of condensed milk and finish with a sprinkling of lime zest.