Carlo Ancelotti has dismissed Liverpool’s criticism of Jordan Pickford and insisted the challenge that injured Virgil van Dijk in the Merseyside derby was mistimed rather than malicious. The Everton manager, who will be without James Rodríguez at Southampton on Sunday as a result of a foul by Van Dijk at Goodison Park, has come to the defence of the goalkeeper following a week of fierce criticism over the tackle that left the Liverpool defender with damage to an anterior cruciate ligament. Georginio Wijnaldum intensified the condemnation of Pickford on Tuesday when the Liverpool midfielder accused the England international of being “completely stupid” and Everton of going too far in derbies. Jürgen Klopp said he shared his players’ opinion on the incident. Ancelotti, however, insists the attacks on Pickford have gone too far – Merseyside police are investigating threats made towards the keeper and Richarlison on social media – and that Liverpool should accept injuries are an unfortunate part of the game. “To be clear, we are really sorry for the injury of Virgil van Dijk,” he said. “Every one of us hopes he can recover soon and well. There was this contact with Jordan Pickford: it was mistimed contact. But the fact the Premier League is so fast, it is not so difficult to arrive a little bit later. It can happen. “Jordan arrived a little bit later but his intention was to try to reach the ball. It was not to hurt Virgil van Dijk. And after that the reaction is too much. To say it was premeditated, and this and that, in my opinion, is too much. And Virgil van Dijk knows this. It’s football. Unfortunately in football you can be injured. Jordan is really sad, really disappointed [that van Dijk is injured] but to say it was premeditated, to say it was stupid, is not fair.” Rodríguez played the full game against Liverpool despite being injured after 40 seconds by Van Dijk’s challenge. Ancelotti said: “He had a mistimed tackle with Virgil van Dijk at the beginning of the game and I think he will not be available for the game against Southampton.” Séamus Coleman is expected to be sidelined for two to three weeks with a hamstring problem sustained in the derby but Jonjo Kenny has returned to training after injury and is in line to deputise for the captain at St Mary’s Stadium.