A week after returning to the White House following his hospitalization at Walter Reed medical center for Covid-19, Donald Trump is back on the campaign trail and “doing what he loves most: spreading Covid 19”, said Trevor Noah on the Daily Show. Trump held his first rally in weeks in Sanford, Florida, with an air of triumph; facing supporters without a mask, the president said he felt “so powerful”, and mused about walking straight into the crowd – “I’ll walk in there and kiss everyone in that audience.” Trump has emerged from his battle with coronavirus, and it's made him… horny as hell? pic.twitter.com/Xik000mtJU “It looks like Trump has emerged from his battle with the deadly virus and it’s made him horny as hell,” Noah said. “I guess it’s true what they say: a serious illness can make you realize what’s most important in life.” “And also, kissing the women and the guys? Whew! I’m happy that Trump is now biohazard-curious,” Noah joked. Though Noah said he was glad the president was feeling better, “his recovery is going to be awful for public health. How are his supporters going to take coronavirus seriously if it can be beaten by a guy whose body is 83% chicken nuggets? “The fact is, Trump’s behavior sets an example for the people around him. And you can see at the rally that people are already taking corona a whole lot less seriously.” The Florida governor, Ron DeSantis, for example, attended Trump’s rally without a mask, high-fived supporters, and then wiped his nose with his bare hand. “This just shows you how powerful Trumpism is,” Noah said of the clip. “His supporters think that his success is their success. They’re running around that rally like they got over Covid.” It’s a message of universal invincibility the Trump campaign has been eager to play up with unfounded claims that a vaccine will be widely available by the end of the year. Reports of delays to vaccine trials and repeated warnings from health officials on the efficacy of fast-tracked Covid treatments are no matter, according to the campaign. “The real news” in Trump world is that “coronavirus has been handled”, said Noah, because “If the president of the United States, with his team of 60 doctors and a hospital in his house and access to unreleased drugs can beat this virus, then clearly, anyone can do it.” In Los Angeles, Jimmy Kimmel reported on back-to-back rallies for “our Pez-brain president” on Tuesday evening – one in Pennsylvania, and another the prior evening in Sanford, Florida. “Trump did about an hour of material in Florida and he killed, he really killed,” Kimmel deadpanned. “We’ll have to wait a week or two to see how many he killed, but he definitely killed.” Meanwhile, Joe Biden held a drive-in rally in Toledo, Ohio, in which attendees watched him speak from inside their cars. “So no one is getting any virus at Joe Biden’s rally, meanwhile the president is on a cross-country corona-palooza tour,” Kimmel said, replaying footage of attendees shouting “we love you!” in Florida as Trump replied, “thank you”. “Thank you,” Kimmel replied, imitating Trump. “If you die I don’t care, but thank you very much.”