England Women’s friendly against Germany on Tuesday has been cancelled because of a positive coronavirus test for a member of the Lionesses’ backroom staff. Phil Neville’s side were due to face the two-times world champions in Wiesbaden in their first fixture since the SheBelieves Cup in March, with Jill Scott now having to wait to win her 15oth cap. The Football Association said the decision had been made to protect the wellbeing of players and staff, and cited current protocols which would require any individual who tested positive once in Germany to self-isolate for 14 days. “We cannot take the risk that this may happen to a player or member of England staff,” read a statement yesterday. Neville, who is due to step down from his role in September 2021 after the rearranged Olympic Games, added: “While we all wanted to play Tuesday’s game, this was absolutely the right course of action. I thank Germany’s staff for their understanding and our FA colleagues for their support. “I know the fans were hoping to see us play again but I am sure they will understand the decision. We have still had a good week of training and are looking forward to getting together next month before our match against Norway in Sheffield.” The remainder of England’s October camp at St George’s Park has been cancelled and the players will return to their clubs on Sunday. They are next scheduled to play on 1 December, with Neville having organised some intra-squad friendly matches last month in an attempt to fill the shortage of fixtures. Mark Bullingham, chief executive of the FA, added: “This has been a difficult but necessary decision. Nothing is more important than the safety, health and wellbeing of the players and colleagues under our care. We are very grateful to the DFB for their cooperation and understanding and look forward to the possibility of a future fixture in healthier and safer times.” Having made her debut in a 4-0 win over the Netherlands in 2006, midfielder Scott was due to become to second England player to reach the 150-cap milestone after Fara Williams. She will now return to club duties with Manchester City, who are due to face Everton in the FA Cup final on Sunday, having signed a two-year contract extension in the summer that combines her playing role with a coaching position. PA Media