Based on Aldous Huxley’s 1932 novel, this small-screen adaptation stars Downton Abbey’s Jessica Brown Findlay, Demi Moore and Star Wars’ Alden Ehrenreich as residents of the sex-fuelled, caste-based New London, a place where every resident must live their lives publicly. After Bernard Marx (Harry Lloyd) and Lenina Crowne (Findlay) grow disillusioned with the strict confines of New London, they are sent to the Savage Lands – a neglected yet freer side of society, one where an uprising is seemingly being planned. Ammar Kalia Series two of this windswept rural animal odyssey returns to Mourne in Northern Ireland, where local vet Cahir has to rush to perform an emergency C-section on a prize ewe, while long-service practice member Nuala has to decide whether to put down a calf with an infected hoof. AK This nostalgia-toting doc explores how the political upheaval of 1989 brought new movements in hip-hop, dance and in the institution of the BBC’s weekly chart show. Expect cameos from soul singer Seal, superstar DJ Fatboy Slim and archive footage from pop-rap duo Milli Vanilli. AK US artist Terence Nance offers disquieting vignettes on being black in America in his stream of consciousness sketch show, juxtaposing fake children’s shows and an infomercial on curing “white thoughts” with the ever-impending threat of police violence. Hannah J Davies More from the excruciatingly watchable dating show. This time, we meet 22-year-old Aimee who is not sure that true love exists and has decided to explore this proposition by inviting five random blokes, plus a load of cameras, into her house for a week. Fireworks ensue, but who will be the last man standing? Phil Harrison A Bafta, please, for the booker. This lineup is stellar: Dolly Parton, Riz Ahmed, Lolly Adefope, Sara Pascoe and Róisín Murphy, plus piping-hot Hollywood tea from the always good-value Rupert Everett. Social distancing means an end to sofa snuggles, but the good vibes will carry. Ellen E Jones Just Mercy (Destin Daniel Cretton, 2019) 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere The twin blights of racism and poverty loom large in Cretton’s timely legal drama, adapted from lawyer Bryan Stevenson’s memoir. Michael B Jordan plays Stevenson as he sets about defending death row inmate Walter McMillian (Jamie Foxx), wrongly convicted of murder. Quietly intense. Paul Howlett German football: FC Union Berlin v FSV Mainz 05 7.15pm, BT Sport 1. Top-flight Bundesliga clash. Scottish Premier League football: St Johnstone v Celtic 8pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Head to head from McDiarmid Park. PGA Tour golf: The Sanderson Farms Championship 10.15pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Second day’s play.