Another Saturday, another day of VAR torment for Liverpool; only this time Jürgen Klopp’s champions would not be denied victory by strange goings-on at Stockley Park. Diogo Jota’s header took Liverpool to joint-top of the Premier League after Sheffield United had been awarded a controversial penalty and Mohamed Salah refused a stunning goal by VAR. Liverpool managed to make it 62 league games unbeaten at Anfield despite the interventions that are driving Klopp to distraction. They are now just one game short of the club record set between 1978 and 1981. Victory number 51 in that outstanding sequence was hard-fought and not always pretty - Chris Wilder’s side had several opportunities to salvage a point in the second half - but testament to the resilience and focus of Klopp’s players. Alisson’s absence affects Liverpool as much as Virgil van Dijk’s and there was some positive injury news for Klopp with the Brazilian goalkeeper declaring himself fit to return after missing four games with a shoulder problem. Thiago Alcântara and Joël Matip were not available because of knocks sustained in the Merseyside derby, however, and Klopp made a rare formation change to increase his already formidable attacking options. Diogo Jota came in on the right of a 4-2-3-1 with Salah leading the attack. For United, the former Liverpool striker Rhian Brewster made his first start since his £23.5m switch in the transfer window. The champions were almost ahead on 67 seconds when Andy Robertson exploited the space behind the wing-back George Baldock with an inch-perfect pass into the path of Sadio Mané. Aaron Ramsdale, the United goalkeeper, tempted the forward into a first-time shot with an unnecessary sprint to the corner of his penalty area. The Senegal international’s effort beat Ramsdale easily but the covering John Egan was able to clear before Salah could convert into an empty net. Liverpool were dominant from the kick-off and Trent Alexander-Arnold went close moments later with an audacious free-kick after John Lundstram was booked for a foul on Salah. The right-back spotted Ramsdale lurking on the edge of his area once again and, despite being two yards inside his own half, went for goal. Alexander-Arnold’s shot had power and accuracy but the back-pedalling keeper managed to tip over on the line and deny the defender one of the goals of the season. The visitors had not constructed an attack of note before they were gifted a penalty to puncture Liverpool’s positive start. As with the finale to their last Premier League game at Everton, when Jordan Henderson’s 92nd-minute winner was disallowed for a fractional offside against Mane, Klopp and his players were left aghast at the intrusion of VAR. And with good reason once again. It looked a harsh decision to the naked eye when referee Mike Dean initially awarded a free-kick to United for Fabinho’s tackle on Oli McBurnie. The Brazilian appeared to win the ball just outside the area as he attempted to atone for a poor clearance. The VAR official, Andre Marriner, however, ruled that contact was made on the 18-yard line and upgraded Dean’s decision to a penalty. It was the first penalty awarded against Liverpool at Anfield for two years. Sander Berge sent Alisson the wrong way from the penalty spot and United were suddenly emboldened by their lead. Baldock’s excellent crosses from the right were a constant source of danger to Liverpool. McBurnie should have doubled United’s advantage from a superb cross-field ball by the wing-back but, despite finding himself unmarked inside the area and controlling well, his shot lacked any conviction and sailed well wide of Alisson’s far post. Another Baldock delivery teed up Ben Osborn for a full volley that the Liverpool keeper pushed away and United had three more penalty appeals dismissed before the interval. Two - for a handball by Robertson and a push by Alexander-Arnold on McBurnie - were rightly ignored but Jota was fortunate that VAR chose not to review his challenge on Berge when the midfielder darted into the box. There was certainly contact, although not enough to sway the match officials. Baldock and Osborn were effective in denying space to Liverpool’s marauding full-backs but Alexander-Arnold was involved in the hosts’ equaliser late in the first half. His lay off was swept towards the far post by Henderson and Mané, somehow left unmarked, met the excellent cross with a powerful header. Ramsdale saved, but the ball dropped kindly for Firmino to tap home his first goal of what by his elevated standards has been an underwhelming season so far. Brewster was replaced by Oliver Burke early in the second half having not had a chance to remind his former club of his quality in front of goal. The substitute almost made an immediate impression when he charged down Alisson’s attempted clearance but the keeper escaped with conceding only a throw-in. McBurnie then had an angled shot blocked by Joe Gomez after spinning away from Fabinho. Salah thought he had edged Liverpool ahead with a sublime goal as the pressure began to tell on the visiting defence in the second half. The striker’s first touch to control Alexander-Arnold’s cross into the area was beautiful. His second was even better, volleying beyond Ramsdale in the same movement for his 101st goal in Liverpool colours. But no, it was back to 100 when VAR spotted he was just offside when the cross was played. Liverpool were not deflated by their latest slap from technology. Two minutes later the irrepressible Mané delivered a superb cross from the left and Jota, left in too much space by Enda Stevens, steered an unstoppable header beyond Ramsdale. Salah could have given his team the comfort of a two-goal lead when he turned Egan inside the box but chipped against a post from close range.