The government’s coronavirus job retention scheme closes on Saturday, ending the first phase of the UK’s economic response to the pandemic. When the scheme was announced in March it was hailed as an unprecedented intervention by the government, which committed to paying 80% of the wages of any furloughed worker (up to a monthly limit of £2,500). As large parts of the economy were forced to shut down, economists said the policy had been the main factor in preventing a dramatic rise in unemployment. However, almost 32 weeks later, employment data suggests businesses and workers around the country are still relying on government support, even as the generosity of the support has been reduced. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, last week updated the furlough programme’s more limited replacement, the job support scheme. Here is how the UK jobs market has fared during the pandemic. The unemployment rate has risen during the crisis to 4.5% of the workforce in August, compared with a four-decade low of 3.8% before the pandemic arrived. Other indicators suggest a steeper increase in joblessness may be coming. The number of people on employee payrolls has fallen sharply, suggesting 750,000 people had lost work even before the end of the furlough scheme and the second wave of the virus, according to data from HM Revenue and Customs. Every part of the country has been hit hard, but the data also suggests the UK capital has had the largest proportion of workers falling off payrolls, with a 3.5% decrease between September 2019 and September 2020. Northern Ireland was the least affected part of the UK by that measure, although the number of people on payroll still fell by 0.4%. While the furlough scheme gradually became less generous from the end of July onwards, the most up-to-date data suggested it was still sustaining the jobs of 3.3 million people at the end of August, compared with more than 9 million at the scheme’s peak. Economists and politicians are worried companies that are still reliant on furlough at this point will struggle to retain workers unless they are covered by the newer, more limited job support scheme. Britain’s booming service economy has been a boon in recent decades, but some of those sectors have been most reliant on government help during the pandemic. The arts and entertainment industries had the highest proportion of workers still on furlough at the start of October, followed by hotels and restaurants. Workers from black, Asian and minority ethnic backgrounds furloughed in March were among the most likely groups to lose their jobs subsequently, according to analysis by the Resolution Foundation thinktank. The post-furlough fall into unemployment had been most common among BAME workers, with 22% of those furloughed falling out of work. That was significantly higher than the 9% of all furloughed adults who were no longer working by September. Workers aged 16 to 25 were more than twice as likely to lose their jobs than their older counterparts, according to researchers at the London School of Economics. In the past two months, the proportion of 16- to 25-year-old workers who lost their job was 11.1%, compared with 4.6% for those over 26, suggesting the pandemic could drive employment inequalities for years to come.