A timely look at the vexed question of possible Russian interference in the 2016 US election. Alex Gibney’s two-part documentary hears from everyone from cybersecurity operatives to self-proclaimed Russian trolls and, along the way, poses any number of scary questions. Not least of them: isn’t the endlessly contested issue of Russian influence in itself an indication of America’s entrenched division and vulnerability to external manipulation? And how much has really changed in the last four years? Phil Harrison The final episode of this series tracking Donald Trump’s four-year assault on presidential norms. We begin in 2019 with Trump anticipating a gentle coast towards re-election. Enter Covid-19 and Black Lives Matter. Has Trump lost control of the narrative at last? Or will he conjure an unlikely victory? PH Greg Davies’s twisted parlour games are going from strength to strength as the funniest minds are rendered helpless by his challenges. This week, Daisy May Cooper tackles some soggy pasta, Katherine Parkinson has a face-off with a garden arch and Mawaan Rizwan comes up against an impossible illusion. Hannah Verdier By dispensing with narration, this heart-in-mouth doc feels even more immediate as patients are rushed into Royal Stoke’s major trauma centre. Among those requiring urgent assessment are a woman who collapsed at a theme park and a 76-year-old grandpa whose heart rate is somehow hitting 240 bpm. Graeme Virtue Darkly amusing cringe comedy in which disgraced former boyband member Maxxx (O-T Fagbenle) attempts to rebuild his career. As we meet him, Maxxx is mainly doing depressing PAs and spending his downtime misery-scrolling through his ex’s Instagram feed. Can he get the band back together? PH Fans of the HBO show Barry, Ben Mendelsohn’s early work and true-crime podcasts from The Australian are in for a treat. Scott Ryan writes and stars in this brilliantly black comedy. He plays Ray, a heavy-hitter in the Sydney underworld who is also juggling his responsibilities as a single dad. Ellen E Jones The Descent, 1.35am, Film4The first half is a claustrophobic, panicky story of six women trying to scrabble out of a deep, dark cave in the Appalachians … then the mutant cannibals show up. The tension ratchets up almost unbearably, and there’s little of the black humour that Neil Marshall brought to his werewolf fest Dog Soldiers. Paul Howlett Europa League football: Antwerp v Tottenham Hotspur 5.15pm, BT Sport 2. Arsenal v Dundalk follows at 8pm. Europa League football: AEK Athens v Leicester City 5.30pm, BT Sport ESPN. A Group D match from Greece. Super League rugby: Hull Kingston Rovers v Hull FC 7.45pm, Sky Sports Main Event. From the Totally Wicked Stadium