Sharon and Tommy Gee, who run the Spar store in Montgomery, a picturesque town in mid-Wales a mile from the English border, admit they are worried. They operate a friendly shop and are keen both to serve their local community and give a warm welcome to the many visitors drawn by the castle, the cafes, the pubs and the good hiking and cycling routes. But Covid-19 means the steady flow of tourists across the border into a rural area that has had few cases is seen as a mixed blessing. “We’re so close to the border and not far from places that have high Covid rates,” said Sharon. “We are worried,” Tommy added. “It wouldn’t be such a concern if everyone took all the precautions. Most do but there is a minority that don’t.” For weeks, there has been growing anger within the Welsh government over Boris Johnson’s refusal to stop people travelling out of areas in England that are subject to lockdown to places where there are few Covid cases. Whitbread - 6,000 jobs 22 September: Whitbread, which owns the Premier Inn, Beefeater and Brewers Fayre chains, said it would cut 6,000 jobs at its hotels and restaurants, almost one in five of its workforce Pizza Express – 1,100 jobs7 September: The restaurant chain confirms the closure of 73 restaurants as part of a rescue restructure deal. Costa Coffee – 1,650 jobs3 September: The company, which was bought by Coca-Cola two years ago, is cutting up to 1,650 jobs in its cafes, more than one in 10 of its workforce. The assistant store manager role will go across all shops. Pret a Manger – 2,890 jobs27 August: The majority of the cuts are focused on the sandwich chain's shop workers, but 90 roles will be lost in its support centre teams. The cuts include the 1,000 job losses announced on 6 July. Marks & Spencer – 7,000 jobs18 August: Food, clothing and homewares retailer cuts jobs in central support centre, regional management and stores. M&Co – 400 jobs5 August: M&Co, the Renfrewshire-based clothing retailer, formerly known as Mackays, will close 47 of 215 stores. WH Smith – 1,500 jobs5 August: The chain, which sells products ranging from sandwiches to stationery, will cut jobs mainly in UK railway stations and airports. Dixons Carphone – 800 jobs4 August: Electronics retailer Dixons Carphone is cutting 800 managers in its stores as it continues to reduce costs. DW Sports – 1,700 jobs at risk3 August: DW Sports fell into administration, closing its retail website immediately and risking the closure of its 150 gyms and shops. Marks & Spencer – 950 jobs20 July: The high street stalwart cuts management jobs in stores as well as head office roles related to property and store operations. Ted Baker – 500 jobs19 July: About 200 roles to go at the fashion retailer’s London headquarters, the Ugly Brown Building, and the remainder at stores. Azzurri – 1,200 jobs17 July: The owner of the Ask Italian and Zizzi pizza chains closes 75 restaurants and makes its Pod lunch business delivery only Burberry – 500 jobs worldwide15 July: Total includes 150 posts in UK head offices as luxury brand tries to slash costs by £55m after a slump in sales during the pandemic. Boots – 4,000 jobs9 July: Boots is cutting 4,000 jobs – or 7% of its workforce – by closing 48 opticians outlets and reducing staff at its head office in Nottingham as well as some management and customer service roles in stores. John Lewis – 1,300 jobs9 July: John Lewis announced that it is planning to permanently close eight of its 50 stores, including full department stores in Birmingham and Watford, with the likely loss of 1,300 jobs. Celtic Manor – 450 jobs9 July: Bosses at the Celtic Collection in Newport, which staged golf's Ryder Cup in 2010 and the 2014 Nato Conference, said 450 of its 995 workers will lose their jobs. Pret a Manger – 1,000 jobs6 July: Pret a Manger is to permanently close 30 branches and could cut at least 1,000 jobs after suffering “significant operating losses” as a result of the Covid-19 lockdown Casual Dining Group – 1,900 jobs2 July: The owner of the Bella Italia, Café Rouge and Las Iguanas restaurant chains collapsed into administration, with the immediate loss of 1,900 jobs. The company said multiple offers were on the table for parts of the business but buyers did not want to acquire all the existing sites and 91 of its 250 outlets would remain permanently closed. Arcadia – 500 jobs1 July: Arcadia, Sir Philip Green’s troubled fashion group – which owns Topshop, Miss Selfridge, Dorothy Perkins, Burton, Evans and Wallis – said in July 500 head office jobs out of 2,500 would go in the coming weeks. SSP Group – 5,000 jobs1 July: The owner of Upper Crust and Caffè Ritazza is to axe 5,000 jobs, about half of its workforce, with cuts at its head office and across its UK operations after the pandemic stalled domestic and international travel. Harrods – 700 jobs1 July: The department store group is cutting one in seven of its 4,800 employees because of the “ongoing impacts” of the pandemic. Harveys – 240 jobs30 June: Administrators made 240 redundancies at the furniture chain Harveys, with more than 1,300 jobs at risk if a buyer cannot be found. TM Lewin – 600 jobs30 June: Shirtmaker TM Lewin closed all 66 of its outlets permanently, with the loss of about 600 jobs. Monsoon Accessorize – 545 jobs11 June: The fashion brands were bought out of administration by their founder, Peter Simon, in June, in a deal in which 35 stores closed permanently and 545 jobs were lost. Mulberry – 470 jobs8 June: The luxury fashion and accessories brand is to cut 25% of its global workforce and has started a consultation with the 470 staff at risk. The Restaurant Group – 3,000 jobs3 June: The owner of dining chains such as Wagamama and Frankie & Benny’s has closed most branches of Chiquito and all 11 of its Food & Fuel pubs, with another 120 restaurants to close permanently. Total job losses could reach 3,000. Clarks – 900 jobs21 May: Clarks plans to cut 900 office jobs worldwide as it grapples with the growth of online shoe shopping as well as the pandemic. Oasis and Warehouse – 1,800 jobs30 April: The fashion brands were bought out of administration by the restructuring firm Hilco in April, with all of their stores permanently closed and 1,800 jobs lost. Cath Kidston – 900 jobs21 April: More than 900 jobs were cut immediately at the retro retail label Cath Kidston after the company said it was permanently closing all 60 of its UK stores. Debenhams – 4,000 jobs9 April: At least 4,000 jobs will be lost at Debenhams in its head office and closed stores after its collapse into administration in April, for the second time in a year. Laura Ashley – 2,700 jobs17 March: Laura Ashley collapsed into administration, with 2,700 job losses, and said rescue talks had been thwarted by the pandemic. On Friday, the Welsh first minister, Mark Drakeford, made it clear that if the prime minister did not take action, his government would bring in rules that would effectively stop people from English hotspots crossing the border. Montgomery in Powys, where there is no lockdown, is the sort of place the Welsh government is keen to protect. The approach from Drakeford’s government means that a person from Wrexham in north Wales, which is in local lockdown, is not allowed to leave their area unless they have a “reasonable excuse”. A day out to Montgomery would not be allowed. But the town is only a couple of hours drive from areas subject to local lockdowns in the West Midlands and the north-west of England. People are able to travel freely – and are doing so – from those areas to Montgomery. Cerys Thomas, a local town councillor, said she was worried about vulnerable elderly people in the town: “It is concerning that people can travel from high-risk areas.” The people of Montgomery are at pains to stress that there is no anti-English feeling in this. “We welcome visitors,” said Thomas. “We rely on tourism. But there’s a delicate balance between keeping our businesses going and making sure our residents are healthy. We’d like visitors to think about that balance between coming here and enjoying themselves and the danger of bringing in the virus.” Sue Blower, Montgomery’s town crier, said the town felt like a “bubble” floating between hotspot areas but she does not know how a ban on people travelling from English hotspots could be enforced. “I’m not sure how we could stop people. We can’t put a barrier on the border.” Visit Mid Wales is having to tread a very delicate balance. The front page of its website declares: “Mid Wales is Open” and promotes stargazing, mountain biking and seaside breaks. It is encouraging people to visit safely but spells out the rules. Phil Owens, a beef and sheep owner and the chairman of Taste Montgomery, which promotes local producers, said he felt sorry for tourism businesses and shops. “They don’t know what to do for best. They need the trade but have to keep safe too.” Edward Bowen-Jones, 82, a retired physiologist, said: “Seventy per cent of our income is tourism. People need to keep coming here but we have to find a way of keeping people of my generation safe.” The website of the beautiful half-timbered 17th-century Dragon Hotel says it is “fully open” but manager Lesley Williams said it was much quieter than it would be at this time of year. She said the rules ought to be framed in such a way that people could use their common-sense to decide whether what they are doing is safe or not. “We need to let people take responsibility for themselves,” she said. “The vast majority want to do the right thing.” “There are so many mixed messages,” said Mary Bunner, whose family have run Bunners ironmongers in Montgomery since 1892. “It feels like a bit of a merry-go-round at the moment.” She can’t see why the four UK governments can’t come up with a unified plan. “Surely four people can have a meeting and work out the rules together?”