George Furbank 6/10 Has much to do to convince he is England’s long-term full-back, though this was better than his first two caps. Made key defensive intervention before half-time. Anthony Watson 5 Runs too laterally at times and hard to escape the feeling he is better suited to playing full-back. Very little space in which to demonstrate his footwork. Jonathan Joseph 5 Anonymous for most of the match. Not entirely his fault given England’s propensity to kick so often but did not take his chance in Manu Tuilagi’s absence. Henry Slade 6 Does not look as comfortable playing one in at inside-centre but continued prolific try-scoring form. Riding the crest of a wave after double success with Exeter Jonny May 6 Always looks for work and got through plenty of kick-chasing but, like his fellow outside backs, was well shackled. A couple of grubbers did not sit up for him. Owen Farrell (capt) 6 First match since early September and a touch rusty. Wasted few opportunities to go to the skies early on, but when he did not, he set up Youngs for his try. Ben Youngs 9 Key contributions in 100th appearance. England badly needed his second try and he delivered. Will be all the more pleased after injury in Rome two years ago. Mako Vunipola 6 Strong first scrum and lovely soft hands to put Farrell clear for Youngs’s first try. But will be under pressure for his starting spot when Joe Marler returns to fitness. Jamie George 7 Like Youngs, he marked his milestone appearance with a try on his 50th cap. Solid at the set-piece too. You wouldn’t put it past him racking up another 50. Kyle Sinckler 6 Made presence felt at the scrum, but was at fault for Polledri’s try and not his usual conspicuous self in the loose. Has not been for Bristol either since restart. Maro Itoje 8 Always a nuisance and was able to raise England’s energy levels early in second half. Was in excellent form at end of domestic season and continued that here. Jonny Hill 6 Not the best start to his international career with a yellow card. Recovered well, with important charge down in buildup to England’s second try. Tom Curry 7 Moved back to blindside, began with an early turnover and charge down and continued with a typically all-action display, finishing off with fourth try. Sam Underhill 6 A walking Halloween costume when covered in blood in the first half. Made a few of his trademark thumping hits, but not wholly as effective as he can be. Billy Vunipola 6 Some strong carries in his first England appearance since World Cup final. They need his carrying at the moment, but not yet back at the level he was. REPLACEMENTS Tom Dunn (for George, 79), Ellis Genge (for M Vunipola, 59) On the periphery 6, Will Stuart (for Sinckler, 63) Strong at the scrum 6, Charlie Ewels (for Hill, 68) Got stuck in 6, Ben Earl (for Underhill, 54) High energy 6, Dan Robson (for Youngs, 73) A couple of glimpses 7, Ollie Lawrence (for Joseph, 68), Ollie Thorley (for Watson, 54) Little impact on first cap 6 Matteo Minozzi 6 (Guglielmo Palazzani 47); Edoardo Padovani 5 (FedericoMori 23), Luca Morisi 5, Carlo Canna 6, Mattia Bellini 5; Paolo Garbisi 5,Marcello Violi 5; Danilo Fischetti 5 (Simone Ferrari 61), Luca Bigi 5(Gianmarco Lucchesi 61), Giosuè Zilocchi 6 (Pietro Ceccarelli 61), MarcoLazzaroni 5 (Johan Meyer 78), Niccolò Cannone 5 (Davis Sisi 61), SebastianNegri 7 (Maxime Mbanda 73), Braam Steyn 6, Jake Polledri 8.