On Tuesday evening, a large (449-page) pdf landed in my inbox. It’s the majority report of the US House of Representatives judiciary committee’s subcommittee on antitrust, commercial and administrative law and it makes ideal bedside reading material for only two classes of person: competition lawyers and newspaper columnists. But even if it’s unlikely to be a bestseller, its publication is still a landmark event because it marks the first concerted (and properly resourced) critical interrogation of a new group of unaccountable powers that is roaming loose in our democracies: tech companies. Its guiding spirit was something said by the great Supreme Court justice Louis Brandeis many moons ago: “We must make our choice. We may have democracy or we may have wealth concentrated in the hands of a few, but we cannot have both.” Only four tech companies were targeted – Amazon, Apple, Facebook and Google. How Microsoft escaped scrutiny is a mystery (to me anyway); perhaps it’s because that company had its day in court long ago and survived to become the handmaiden of governments and organisations everywhere and is therefore part of the ruling establishment. The inquiry that led to the report started in 2019 as an investigation into the state of competition online. It had three aims: “1) to document competition problems in digital markets; 2) examine whether dominant firms are engaging in anticompetitive conduct; and 3) assess whether existing antitrust laws, competition policies and current enforcement levels are adequate to address these issues.” Crudely summarised, its conclusions are: there are indeed serious competitions problems in digital markets; dominant firms are behaving in grossly anticompetitive ways; existing laws do need updating; and enforcement has, to date, been patchy and in many cases woefully inadequate. The cynical response to these findings is that we knew all that, so what’s new? Two answers: first, that we didn’t have evidence on such a massive and detailed scale and to make reforms possible in a law-abiding democracy you need evidence-based policy; and second, this is the first time that legislators in the jurisdiction that still matters most in the tech arena – the United States – have started to take these things seriously. Republicans on the subcommittee obsessed about only one thing: social media 'censoring' of ‘conservative’ opinions Another significant thing about the report is that it signals the beginning of the end for a judicial mindset that has for decades enfeebled antitrust action in the US. This intellectual passivity can be traced to the late 1970s and particularly to the publication of a landmark book, The Antitrust Paradox by Robert Bork, a prominent judge and legal scholar. The thrust of his argument was that antitrust law in the US had, over many decades, focused too much on ensuring competition in markets rather than protecting consumers. Since consumers often benefited from corporate mergers that led to giant companies, antitrust law should therefore focus on consumer welfare rather than on ensuring competition. And, of course, for “consumer welfare” read “lower prices”. This philosophy was enthusiastically taken on by influential Chicago law school scholars and their colleagues in the economics department, including Milton Friedman, the high priest of neoliberal economics. And then along comes the internet, followed by the web and the headlong growth of firms such as Google, offering “free” services, and Amazon, offering cut-price online retailing. Bork’s arguments were music to the ears of tech entrepreneurs riding the power of network effects in winner-take-all markets and yet, by Bork’s criterion, doing nothing but good for consumers while becoming monopolies in the process. Applying old antitrust doctrines to such giant firms was, according to the new mindset, tantamount to punishing excellence. Bork’s legacy – legislative and judicial tolerance of the growth of digital monopolies – goes a long way to explaining why tech companies have enjoyed such a free ride over several decades. The House subcommittee’s investigation was the most tangible sign to date that those good times may be coming to an end. The intellectual and legislative climate has changed. But even if that’s true, there’s a long and rocky road ahead. The report, remember, is a “majority” one: it represents only the views of the Democratic majority on the subcommittee. Although the investigation originally began as a bipartisan one, as things came to the crunch the pathologically polarised politics of the US eventually surfaced in the committee room. In fact, this was obvious during the televised grilling of the CEOs of the four tech giants at the end of July. While Democrats on the subcommittee probed the witnesses about their abuses of monopoly power, Republicans, one of them a flake of Cadbury proportions, obsessed about only one thing: social media “censoring” of “conservative” (AKA rightwing) opinions. Not surprisingly, when it came to signing the report, all of the Republicans balked. What happens next depends, like everything else, on what happens on 3 November. If Biden wins and the Democrats gain control of the Senate as well as the House, then the tech giants will have big problems on their hands, because they will be dealing with legislators and regulators who know what they’re doing. If Trump wins, well, they’ll just be facing a screwball with a short attention span. For all I know, they might think that’s the better option – for them. Stay tuned: only 23 days to go. Selling sharesOn the Social Media Collective’s website, a very insightful critique by Niall Docherty of the film The Social Dilemma.Truckload of troubleWhat happens if there’s no Brexit trade deal? You can guess the answer, but Politico has done a really useful deep dive into the matter.Growing pains Thirty Glorious Years is a lovely, long-sweep essay by Jonathan Hopkin on the Aeon site about how our democracy got to its current state.