The Football Association chairman, Greg Clarke, has admitted he was involved in formulating a document that advocated the introduction of Premier League B teams to the lower leagues and the creation of a Premier League 2 in early talks over Project Big Picture. Clarke said this week he had been involved in Project Big Picture discussions but had walked away “when the principal aim of these discussions became the concentration of power and wealth in the hands of a few clubs with a breakaway league mooted as a threat”. He is also understood to have criticised the chair of the EFL, Rick Parry, for his involvement in negotiations during a meeting of Premier League shareholders this week. On Thursday, however, Clarke admitted to having invited representatives of the EFL and Premier League to join discussions on Project Big Picture. He acknowledged his involvement in a leaked briefing document that not only advocated B teams but the creation of a Premier League 2, the end of elite academies in the lower leagues and an end to all cup replays. The aim of Project Big Picture, the document argues, would be to “make the game more inclusive for all”. In a statement, Clarke said: “It is an important part of my job to work together with key stakeholders across the game to discuss and evaluate potential improvements to the structure of English football that would have a positive long-term effect at every level of the game. The paper captures a summary of what areas and issues were discussed at an early meeting. “I encouraged Premier League and EFL involvement in these discussions for greater transparency across the game. The EFL joined but the Premier League had an interim chair at the time, and the acting CEO made the decision to not attend.“As the discussions progressed I and others were unhappy with the direction of travel in terms of major redistribution of money and power to bigger clubs and the mooting of a breakaway. I confirmed earlier this week that at this point I made the decision to discontinue my involvement in these discussions.”