It has hardly been the easiest time for single people to find love, with an ever-changing profusion of rules throughout the pandemic blocking their path to meeting that special someone. But now those waiting for Cupid’s arrow to strike have been dealt a fresh blow – as Downing Street has confirmed that couples living apart in areas under tougher restrictions can only meet outdoors, unless they are in support bubbles. And, if the prospect of outdoor-only encounters during the bitter winter months was not grim enough, Boris Johnson’s official spokesman clarified that they are not even meant to touch each other under social distancing rules. With more than half of England’s population set to be living in areas classed as “high ” or “very high” alert – the top two tiers of Covid restrictions – by midnight on Friday, the rules, described by some as a “sex ban”, could break the hearts of many. Asked if couples living apart in tier 2 areas can see each other indoors, the prime minister’s official spokesman said on Friday: “The rules on household mixing in tier 2, I think, set out that you should mix with your own household only unless you’ve formed a support bubble, and that obviously does apply to some couples.” The prime minister’s spokesman clarified that the restrictions were set out in law. According to the government, a support bubble is where “a household with one adult joins with another household. Households in that support bubble can still visit each other, stay overnight, and visit public places together.” However, if neither person in a couple lived alone, they would not be able to form a support bubble – meaning they could only meet outdoors with each other in tier 2 areas. Asked why an exemption for “established relationships” was not written into the law for those in tiers 2 and 3, Johnson’s spokesman added: “Because the purpose of the measures we’ve put in place is to break the chain of transmission between households, and the scientific advice is that there is greatest transmission of the virus indoors.” Pressed on whether the government expects couples in established relationships meeting outdoors to socially distance, the spokesman said that the rules set out that people should “follow social distancing and the hand, face, space rules”.