Serves 6-8 Crunch and texture. Texture and crunch … A good slaw is a fantastic and simple way to give yourself a vegetable boost. You can pair a slaw with pretty much anything. In this recipe I’ve included fennel and silverbeet for a twist on the classic cabbage slaw. 6 silverbeet leaves, finely chopped 200g red cabbage, finely sliced2 red onions, finely sliced1 fennel bulb, trimmed and finely sliced from top to bottom1 bunch of flat-leaf parsley, leaves and stalks roughly chopped 300g whole-egg mayonnaise, plus extra if needed juice of 1 lemonsea salt and freshly ground black pepperextra-virgin olive oil, for drizzling Combine the silverbeet, cabbage, onion, fennel and parsley in a large mixing bowl. Stir through the mayonnaise, adding a little more if you prefer a wetter consistency. Transfer the slaw to a serving bowl. Add the lemon juice, season well with salt and pepper and drizzle over a little olive oil. Serves 6-8 Our kids love these roast potatoes and they’re often top of the list of dishes they ask me to make. The vinegar is a play on chips and malt vinegar – a trend Australia has been missing out on for years. I strongly encourage you to try it! 8 to 10 desiree potatoes, peeled and quarteredSea salt and freshly ground black pepperVegetable oil, for roasting1 garlic bulb, unpeeled, cloves smashed using the side of a knife 1 bunch of thyme1 bunch of rosemary100g salted butter, roughly chopped For the vinegar300ml white wine vinegar1 bunch of rosemary, leaves picked and chopped1 tbsp caster sugar To make the rosemary vinegar, combine the ingredients in a small bowl and set aside. Preheat the oven to 200C (fan-forced). Place the potato in a large saucepan, cover with cold water and season with salt. Slowly bring to the boil over medium heat, then reduce the heat to a simmer and cook for 20-30 minutes, until the potato is just starting to break up. Drain the potato in a colander and allow to steam dry for about 10 minutes. While the potato is cooling, pour enough vegetable oil into a roasting tin to cover the base and place it in the oven to heat up. Once the potato is dry, tip it into the roasting tin (be careful as the hot oil will splatter) and spread out in a single layer. Roast for 10 minutes, until the base of each potato is golden brown and crisp. Turn the potato over and add the smashed garlic cloves, herbs and butter. Roast for a further 15 minutes, turning the potato frequently to crisp each side, then remove the tin from the oven and strain away any fat. Season with salt and pepper. Spoon the rosemary vinegar into the bottom of a serving dish, then gently place the roast potatoes on top and serve. Serves 4 This is a classic that never fails to impress. The trick to getting perfectly risen and crisp yorkies is to get the oil sizzling hot first and avoid opening the oven door during cooking. The yorkshire puddings can be frozen once cooked and cooled. They will keep for up to three months. Simply reheat them from frozen in a low oven. sea salt and freshly ground black pepper1 x 4kg rack rib-eye of beef2 onions, halved2 garlic bulbs, unpeeled, halved horizontally 4 carrots4 desiree potatoes, quartered 1 bunch of rosemary1 bunch of thyme100ml vegetable oilGrated horseradish root, to serve (optional) For the yorkshire puddingsvegetable oil, for cooking 4 eggs200ml full-cream milk 40g plain floursea salt and freshly ground black pepper Preheat the oven to 220C (fan-forced). Heavily season the outside of the beef (this will ensure a beautiful crust once it is roasted). To sear the beef you can either use a large heavy-based flameproof casserole dish or a barbecue flat plate. Heat either the dish over high hea, then add the beef and sear on all sides for 10-15 minutes, until well browned. Place the onion, garlic, carrot and potato in a large roasting tin and lightly season, then position the herbs on top. Drizzle over the vegetable oil. Sit the seared beef on the herbs and roast in the oven for 10 minutes, then reduce the oven temperature to 160C (fan-forced) and cook for 1 1/2 hours or until the core temperature of the beef is 57C on a kitchen thermometer. Remove the beef from the oven and allow to rest, covered, for at least 20 minutes. Increase the oven temperature to 220C (fan-forced). Meanwhile, to make the yorkshire puddings, pour enough vegetable oil to half-fill six holes of a large muffin tin, then place in the oven to heat up. Whisk the eggs, milk and 1 1/2 tablespoons of water in a large bowl, then rain in the flour and whisk vigorously to beat out the lumps. Season and set aside for 15 minutes, then pour the batter into a jug. Carefully remove the muffin tin from the oven and evenly pour the batter into the oiled muffin holes. Return to the oven and cook, undisturbed, for 20 minutes, until risen and golden. Squeeze the garlic halves into the roasting tin and stir to mix through the vegetables. Slice the beef, grate some horseradish over the top, if desired, and serve with the vegetables and yorkshire puddings. This is an edited extract from The Commonsense Cook by Colin Fassnidge, Published by Plum, RRP $39.99, photography by Alan Benson