Ipswich moved back to the top of League One as Lincoln saw their perfect start ended with a 2-1 home defeat by Bristol Rovers. Hull had their own 100% record wiped out with a 4-1 loss at Fleetwood on Friday night. The Tractor Boys, though, remain unbeaten after posting a 4-1 victory at Blackpool to go a point clear. Town took the lead after 16 minutes through a piledriver from captain Luke Chambers. Gwion Edwards doubled their lead, with Teddy Bishop adding a third before the break. Gary Madine pulled a goal back, but Edwards capped a fine performance with another well-taken goal. Lincoln had looked on course for a fifth straight league win when breaking the deadlock soon after the restart at Sincil Bank. The lead was short-lived, though, as James Daly headed an equaliser. Rovers then got themselves in front before the hour when Brandon Hanlan converted from the spot after being fouled. Saturday’s lunchtime kick-off saw Gillingham beat Oxford 3-1. Goals from Vadaine Oliver, Jacob Melli and Jordan Graham set the Gills on their way. Peterborough won 2-0 at Northampton to move fifth. Nathan Thompson put Posh ahead after 33 minutes, with Reece Brown’s late effort wrapping up the points. Bottom club MK Dons lost 2-1 at Portsmouth, Tom Naylor and Ellis Harrison scoring Pompey’s goals. Plymouth prevailed 2-0 against Burton, with a goal either side of the interval from Luke Jephcott and Byron Moore. Accrington came from behind to beat Rochdale 2-1, Joe Pritchard equalising in the 64th minute before, two minutes later, Jonathan Russell fired into the corner. Crewe saw off Wigan 3-0 at Gresty Road, the goals coming from Luke Offord, Harry Pickering and Mikael Mandron, while a first-half strike from Joe Pigott helped AFC Wimbledon win 1-0 at Swindon. In League Two, Morecambe moved top after extending Oldham’s winless start with a 3-2 success at Boundary Park. Goals from Aaron Wildig, Alex Kenyon and Cole Stockton earned the Shrimps a third successive victory. Harry Kewell’s Latics slip to the bottom following a fourth defeat from five. Salford missed the chance to go second after throwing away a two-goal lead with just four minutes remaining to draw 2-2 with coronavirus-hit Tranmere. James Wilson teed up Richie Towell’s deflected early opener before curling home to put unbeaten City in control. But they were denied victory in dramatic fashion as Paul Lewis levelled in added time, Kieron Morris having started the fightback. Salford’s late collapse saw Cambridge take second spot. Paul Mullin scored twice as the U’s leapfrogged previous league leaders Newport by beating them 2-1. Jamille Matt struck a stylish hat-trick as Forest Green climbed to sixth by coming from behind to win 4-1 at Scunthorpe. Cheltenham occupy fourth after a Tony Craig own goal and Andy Williams’s composed strike helped them overcome Crawley 2-0. Carlisle complete the top seven after Jon Mellish bagged his fourth goal in three games to win 1-0 at Port Vale. At the other end, Southend were denied a first win after Alex Fisher’s stunning injury-time strike snatched a 2-2 draw for Exeter. Jason Demetriou’s penalty looked set to secure an overdue victory for the lowly hosts after Grecians midfielder Joel Randall levelled Brandon Goodship’s opener. Barrow also remain winless having failed to take advantage of playing against 10 men for 81 minutes in the 1-1 draw with Leyton Orient. Walsall came back to draw 1-1 at home to Colchester thanks to Elijah Adebayo’s equaliser, following Callum Harriott’s opener. Bolton and Grimsby remain at the wrong end following a 0-0 draw, while Stevenage’s trip to winless Mansfield also ended goalless.