Ukraine pulled off a shock 1-0 win over Spain in the Nations League at a raucous Olympic Stadium in Kyiv as fans savoured a first ever victory over the 2010 World Cup winners. Andriy Shevchenko’s side took the lead against the run of play in the 76th minute when Viktor Tsyhankov surprised David de Gea by firing home from outside the area after latching on to an outstanding reverse pass from Andriy Yarmolenko. The goal was wildly celebrated by the Ukraine team and some 21,000 fans spaced out across the stadium, with the hosts taking advantage of Uefa regulations allowing 30% capacity at certain matches in an easing of coronavirus restrictions. Ukraine had lost their previous three games, including a 4-0 defeat by Spain last month and a 7-1 thrashing by France in a friendly last week, after losing six players due to Covid-19 positive tests. Spain took control in the first half and practically monopolised possession, nearly going ahead with a Sergio Ramos free-kick that struck the bar and when Ansu Fati caught a clear sight of goal but missed the target. Ukraine were much better after the break and Oleksandr Zubkov missed a golden chance when he deceived De Gea in the area but somehow missed the target with the goal gaping. Spain then went for the jugular, as Rodri hit the post and Mikel Oyarzabal was thwarted by the outstanding Georgiy Bushchan, who was making only his third appearance after three other goalkeepers tested positive for the coronavirus. Yet the visitors were soon undone down the other end by some lax goalkeeping from De Gea and were left to dwell on a shock defeat in the stadium where they beat Italy 4-0 in the Euro 2012 final. Viktor Tsygankov got the better of David De Gea to hand Ukraine a shock win v Spain in the #NationsLeague Also in League A Group Four, Germany twice had to come from behind to earn a rollercoaster 3-3 draw against Switzerland. The visitors stunned Germany with Mario Gavranovic’s fifth-minute header and doubled the lead in the 26th when they intercepted a pass from Toni Kroos, in his 100th international, and Remo Freuler beat Manuel Neuer with a cool chip. Timo Werner hit back two minutes later, wrong-footing Yann Sommer with a clever low shot, as Germany maintained possession and kept pushing forward. Robin Gosens’ effort was tipped over the bar by Sommer late in the first half but the keeper was beaten when Kai Havertz charged into the box and fired home the equaliser 10 minutes after the restart. Joachim Löw reverted to a four-man defence but Germany kept leaking goals as the Swiss went back in front after Neuer made consecutive saves from Haris Seferovic before Gavranovic pounced to drill in on the rebound. A sensational Serge Gnabry back-heel flick on the hour pulled the home side level once more and the Swiss finished the match with 10 men following the stoppage-time dismissal of the defender Fabian Schär for a second booking. Timo Werner tees up Serge Gnabry and Germany are level in a crazy game against Switzerland 📺 Watch the #NationsLeague clash live on Sky Sports Football nowpic.twitter.com/3PGBQnb2bV “It was extremely intense. We started badly but showed great attitude in coming back,” Löw said. “That was positive. In defence we made our share of mistakes which we have to stop. But we showed that the team is ready to fight.” Havertz added: “We have to defend better, defend more intelligently and smarter. But we kept coming back, we showed a strong mentality.” The result moves Germany within a point of leaders Spain while Switzerland, who are still without a win, remain bottom.