Louisiana was preparing to be battered once again by winds of close to 120mph and a potentially deadly storm surge later on Friday as Hurricane Delta made its way towards America’s Gulf coast. After hitting north-eastern Mexico on Wednesday, Delta, now a category three storm, was expected to make landfall in the US on Friday night. But the coasts of Louisiana and Texas were already feeling its effects by the morning. Delta is predicted to hit south-western Louisiana – including Lake Charles - an area still suffering from the death and destruction caused by Hurricane Laura just six weeks ago. The storm is then forecast to move on to Mississippi on Saturday before reaching Tennessee on Sunday. As well as hurricane-force winds, the National Hurricane Center (NHC) warned of a “life-threatening” storm surge of up to 11ft from High Island, Texas, to Ocean Springs, Mississippi, and up to 15in of rain. Heavy rainfall could lead to “significant” flash flooding in parts of Louisiana on Friday and Saturday, they said. Andy Latto, a hurricane specialist at the National Hurricane Center (NHC), said the hurricane’s current intensity is 120mph but that winds might decrease slightly before it makes landfall in western Louisiana on Friday night.He warned the wind is expected to inflict “extensive damage” on the coast, as well as a “very large” storm surge. Between 5 and 10in of rain is forecast for south-western and central parts of the state, while 3-6in are expected in extreme eastern Texas, northern Louisiana, southern Arkansas and western Mississippi. A state of emergency was in place in Louisiana and Mississippi. In an unprecedented Atlantic hurricane season, in which Delta is the 25th, this is the sixth time that Louisiana has faced the threat of tropical storms or hurricanes.On 27 August, Hurricane Laura caused devastation across the south-west of the state, killing more than 30 people. Residents prepared for the storm with sandbags and boarding up windows. Mandatory evacuation orders were in place in multiple areas including parishes in Lake Charles. West Calcasieu Cameron hospital in Sulphur started evacuating patients on Thursday “out of an abundance of caution”.Louisiana’s governor, John Bel Edwards, told residents on Thursday night: “To the people of south-west Louisiana, I know you are strong. I also know you’re about to be tested again. Please finish making preparations now. We will get through this.”On Friday morning, he said: “Whether you evacuated or are at home, stay off the roads and listen to the advice of local officials. Be smart and be safe today.”“People of Lake Charles and in Cameron parish have already suffered enough, and then here comes this one,” said Desi Milligan, the owner of an RV park in Cameron that was damaged by Laura, told AP. As he stocked up on groceries in Abbeville, Tony Russo said: “I don’t know really any different … 2020 has been a hell of a year.” There was gridlock for miles on the streets and interstates in south-west Louisiana on Thursday as residents tried to evacuate. Meanwhile, more than 100 dogs were evacuated from Louisiana in preparation for the hurricane and flown to San Diego, California.Scientists say the unusually busy hurricane season is being powered in part by climate change – which is making storms more powerful by increasing heat in the ocean and moisture in the atmosphere and making rapid intensification more common. Huge piles of debris on the streets of Lake Charles could be thrown around by Delta and, from the air, there are thousands of buildings protected only by blue tarpaulins placed over roofs damaged by Laura.