Years have passed since Darren Fletcher, in the midst of yet another botched qualifying campaign, used post-match media duties to voice a firm belief that too many people in Scotland didn’t want the international side to succeed. The written press included. Fletcher was swiftly dissuaded of his notion – why would journalists not want to follow their country in a major tournament? – but insight from the captain was telling. Neither Steve Clarke nor Andy Robertson have voiced anything approaching Fletcher’s disquiet but a similar inference has been there. When speaking around a number of matches, Scotland’s manager and captain have called for a united front while taking the odd swipe at perceived negativity. In Robertson’s case, this is amusing; the Liverpool player has enjoyed nothing but gushing praise in his homeland for years. In truth, a rump of Scottish football fans have become disillusioned or disinterested with the national team after decades in the doldrums. Only extremists actually wish them ill. Those of cynical disposition have justification, given the tales of woe that have transpired since Scotland competed in the France World Cup of 1998. The hard fact is Scotland are one game away from a first finals appearance since Morocco embarrassed them in Saint-Étienne. As criticism – and waves of it – flowed forward in the aftermath of a penalty shootout win over Israel, Clarke stood on the verge of history. It was almost forgivable that the Scottish FA’s permanently embattled directors breached all social distancing guidelines as Kenny McLean slotted home the winning spot-kick. The governing body, fiscally harmed by a tournament drought long before coronavirus took hold, has been afforded a potential lifeline. After tankings at the hands of Belgium and Russia, Scotland under Clarke are unbeaten in six games. Some will apply asterisks to that run – San Marino are among the opposition – but Scotland lost any right to win long ago. The latest clash with Israel was the definition of tedium for 120 minutes and yet, when it mattered, Clarke’s players were composed. Nobody will remember or care how victory was achieved if the Scots defeat Serbia to seal a Euro 2020 berth. Scotland should have learned to settle for positive outcomes rather than re-enactments of 1970 Brazil. That Scotland lacked ambition and attacking fluency against Israel is undeniable. Yet theories relating to how comfortable Clarke’s men should be against mediocre opposition are weighted in irrelevant history. Robertson might be a star player but he can influence matches only to a limited extent from left-back. John McGinn, whose dynamism is a sight to behold, was part of an Aston Villa team which scraped away from relegation last season. McLean was relegated with Norwich, the goalkeeper David Marshall remains in the Championship with Derby and Lyndon Dykes, the supposed bright new hope at centre-forward, is a Queens Park Rangers player. Scotland had two Motherwell men in their defensive line. The scale of Scottish onfield celebrations show Clarke has created admirable team spirit, whether through a siege mentality or otherwise. Scott McTominay enjoyed his best game yet in a much talked about back three which wasn’t really troubled. Declan Gallagher belied doubts with his own strong showing at centre-back and Marshall continued excellent international form. Defensively Scotland looked well drilled, as is significant given the cheap goal concessions which have undermined campaign after campaign. Scotland defeated Israel despite the Covid-19-related disruption to the buildup, triggering the enforced absence of Stuart Armstrong, Kieran Tierney and Ryan Christie. Common consensus will be that Serbia, who saw off Norway, will prove too strong for Scotland in November with a finals place at stake. Clarke, though, was a specialist in the role of the underdog when guiding Kilmarnock to third place in Scotland’s top flight. This kind of fixture, where discipline should be more important than vim, may be right up the Scotland manager’s street. When Scotland face Slovakia and the Czech Republic between now and next midweek, Clarke is playing with house money and, one assumes, early deployment of ideas which could stifle the Serbs. Of the outfield players who featured against Israel, nobody is older than 29. Not only are Clarke’s squad pretty inexperienced at international level, the circumstances they have encountered have generally been unsatisfactory. Thursday evening, in front of an empty Hampden, was ugly but perhaps that isn’t altogether relevant. Scotland needs a reminder of how meaningful finals appearances can be; this group is one glorious tie away from serving one. For that, they are due credit.