COndiVIDendo 19 is a photographic and social project about the cohabitation of Italian citizens during the Covid-19 crisis. The title comes from the Italian condividere, which means sharing, and the images show groups of people living together in isolation, whether they are families, single people or mixed groups. Paolo and Susak, couple, Fuerteventura, Spain, 2020 Every picture belongs to two authors, the home-based photographer and the subject, and they share the whole process of creation of the final picture via a video call. The subjects their time, their life, their intimacy and their image, first with the photographer and then with society. This process, in addition to the narration of the day-to-day cohabitation of the subjects, serves the social and community purpose of sharing your own mental and physical condition, from inside to outside, similar to the very human need to interact with the rest of the community. Rudy and Kebrom, couple, Florence, Italy. Rudy: “It has been a hard time. We have tried to spend time together dedicating ourselves to our passions in our small house in Florence. We managed to train in the little space we had at home. It was difficult but we succeeded and so we were able to vent our anxieties and emotions of that difficult moment.” Beatrice and Mattia, couple, Carrara, Italy, 2020 Some families managed to reunite after the Italian government imposed lockdown measures on 9 March 2020, while others were separated, with some family members left stranded in remote places. In other cases, single people were forced to cohabit with strangers. During the health crisis, the meaning attached to the word cohabitation has changed, creating new relations from a forced sharing, in particular, of spaces, habits, feelings and fears. Albini family: mother, father and daughter, Rimini, Italy, 2020 Giulia was able to observe at first hand the great love between her parents, who in lockdown celebrated 47 years of marriage. But, for the first time, it was she who took care of them, not vice versa. Maria Vittoria sewed the masks using the online “tutors” (video tutorials), found by Giulia, while she was taught the secrets of the garden. She also discovered the joys of Netflix. Family Vannucci-Becattini and Valentina, Reggello, 2020 This picture was taken in the countryside of Reggello, in the province of Florence, at the Casellina Laghi farm and agriturismo. Massimo Vannucci, 69 (left), and his wife Rossana Ferrini, 62, are the parents of Giulia Vannucci, 40, who is standing on the tractor. With them is Giulia’s partner Angela Becattini, 34, who is at the wheel. At the bottom right is their employee and friend Valentina Desideri, 40. The six puppies, Frido, Orso, Storti, Benni, Sumio and Brasco, should have gone for adoption during lockdown but instead remained in the family. During the lockdown, they started a wine company. Paloma, Gabriel, Teresa Victor, José, Sofie, Macarena, Jorge, Coinquilini, Deserto Atacama, Spain, 2020. Teresa: “We had recently left for Spain in the desert direction of the Atacama. We arrived in the desert and started our journey. We heard about the health emergency in Italy, but by then it was too late. So we decided in a meeting that we would continue the journey and when possible we would come back to Italy. We were afraid we could not return home, but we continued our journey away from the health emergency.” Prisca and Val Del Raval, London, 2020 Prisca, a photographer, and Val, a stylist and model, live and work in London. During quarantine, they worked from home and organised photoshoots for their clients. Both decided to spend the lockdown living near work, painfully distant from their loved ones. Anna, Flor, Diego, roommates, Montevideo, Uruguay, 2020 Anna: “Diego and I are school teachers and Flor is a sax player. During the lockdown the garden was our salvation. There we were free to share our time while maintaining personal spaces. I was very worried about my relatives in Italy and every day I watched the news from my house in Uruguay”. Fulvia and Piter, couple, Berlin, Germany, 2020 Fulvia: “If before we were planning the next journey, at this moment we were only hoping to be able to see Fulvia’s family in Italy again at some point. Fulvia called every evening with her family back home comparing the numbers in Italy and Germany with the ones of the day before. One of us lost the job, and the other one was lucky enough to be able to work remotely. But yet we were the lucky ones, as we spent our days in our living room learning the things we thought weren’t so important as our job or our life outside. So we practiced singing, playing the guitar, started indoor gardening, creating handmade goods and taking care of each other, in short, we learnt how to give value to our time.” Lucrezia and Olivier, Velez 2020 Lucrezia and Oliver have their own company, Oliver Party Express, which rents furniture. They took advantage of the quarantine to work behind closed doors in the laboratory on new projects. The laboratory, located a few metres from both their homes, allows them to produce new objects. Theirs is a place of work that has become something much more. Arianna Parrotta and Massimo Ferrara, couple, Sapri, Italy, 2020 Massimo Ferrara, 25, a musician and music producer of the crew Lost Dogz, and Arianna Parrotta, 27, a photographer, are pictured with their dog, Truc, in the garden. The couple returned from South America, where they were travelling, during the lockdown – their return was not without difficulty. Kikko Luigina Chemist and Amy the cat, Padova, 2020. Kikko, a bartender, prepares cocktails at home while dressed as drag queen Kikko Luigina Chemist for some livestreaming with her fans. Camilla, Matilde, Alberto, Paolo, Giulia, Martino, Francisco, roommates, Firenze 2020 Camilla, Giulia and Martino could not return to their respective homes because of the lockdown and decided to live together. While in the villa they did activities, such as yoga, study and play board games, to help with their fears and emotions. Pantaleone family, Paris, France, 2020 The ‘bear’ family in Campodoro, in the province of Padua. On the sides, Mauro Sarasin, 51, and Cosma Maria Antonietta Callegari, 64 Pictured are, on the sides, Mauro Sarasin, 51, and Cosma Maria Antonietta Callegari, 64, and daughters Eleonora Sarasin, 24, and Veronica Gambaro, 34, who wears the costume of her animation group “Barbie atomiche”. Veronica says: “Even a lay eye can sense that I have an eventful life. I was partying until the night they called the red zones. I was in Trentino. The quarantine has made me rediscover my home ... the peace of an evening in bed reading with a lighted candle or watching a movie with my sister. Now I no longer go out every night. I also rediscovered the pleasure of being at the table with my parents. Working far away, I never came home, and I missed lunches. Emotionally it was a gift, the quarantine. My family has benefited a lot from it.” Martina and Valter, couple, Padova, Italy, 2020 Martina: “We lived our lockdown locked in our house outside Padua. Walter and I create special effects for the world of cinema. For example, this is an enlarged reconstruction of Rita Levi Montalcini. Luckily we have our own laboratory near home. During the lockdown we were able to work every day and finish some personal projects.” Della Seta family, mother, father, daughter, son, grandmother and family friend, Andrea, Carrara, Italy, 2020 Just before the lockdown, Francesca and her friend Andrea left Milan to join the Della Seta family in Carrara. The two lived in self-quarantine for 15 days in an isolated apartment. They then went to the family home to join grandmother AnnaMaria, Massimo (father), Patrizia (mother) and Tommaso (brother). They spent most of their days together in the garden.