Keir Starmer called on the government to “follow the science” and impose a national “circuit breaker” lockdown of at least two weeks as the death toll from Covid-19 soared to a four-month high. In a significant escalation, the Labour leader said Boris Johnson had “lost control of the virus” and must take urgent action to impose a near-total shutdown across England over October half-term. “If we don’t, we could sleep-walk into a long and bleak winter. That choice is now for the prime minister to make. I urge him to do so,” he said. The call was backed by metro mayors across northern England as official figures showed 143 UK deaths in a single day – the highest since early June. Last month the chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance, warned the country could see 200 daily deaths by mid-November without fresh controls. Late on Monday, papers published by the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) revealed that scientific advisers urged the government to impose a fortnight-long lockdown as long ago as 21 September or risk “catastrophic consequences”, but were ignored. Instead, Johnson announced limited measures including a 10pm pubs curfew, advice to work from home and stricter curbs in worst-hit areas. On Tuesday, two government advisers said that between 3,000 and 107,000 deaths could be avoided by January if strict circuit breaker curbs are imposed from 24 October to 7 November. Graham Medley, who sits on Sage, and Matt Keeling, of the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling, told the Financial Times they would release their findings in a joint paper. With the death toll quadrupling over the past month, Medley warned the UK to expect 400 deaths a day by early November. Speaking at a press conference on Tuesday, Starmer said “the government’s plan simply isn’t working,” adding: “That is why I am calling for a two- to three-week circuit break in England – in line with Sage’s recommendation. A temporary set of clear and effective restrictions designed to get R back below 1. And to reverse the trend of infections and hospitalisations.” He suggested the shutdown, one week of which would coincide with schools’ planned half-term break, could also be used to upgrade the UK’s beleaguered test-and-trace system. The Sage minutes said test and trace was having only a “marginal” and diminishing impact on the spread of the disease. Starmer suggested schools could remain open but non-essential offices and all hospitality businesses would close, though he said they must be compensated by the Treasury. It came as the prime minister faced a significant rebellion from lockdown-sceptics among his own MPs, 42 of whom signalled their discontent by voting against the 10pm pubs and restaurants curfew. The Conservative rebels fired a warning shot amid angry scenes in the Commons where Matt Hancock, the health secretary, criticised lockdown sceptics. Johnson told MPs at the backbench 1922 Committee on Tuesday evening that Starmer was “careering all over the place like a broken shopping trolley”, according to a senior Conservative source who also pointed to the scepticism of some Labour MPs about local lockdown measures. However, government officials have repeatedly insisted a national lockdown remains an option if the situation deteriorates. The prime minister also told several jokes to the 1922 Zoom meeting that landed badly, according to a report citing three sources present. Bloomberg said Johnson had claimed some people were in fact pleased about the rule of six because it meant they could avoid the in-laws at Christmas. When his predecessor, Theresa May, suggested business people attend Sage meetings to advise on the economy, Johnson said it was purely for scientists and adding business would render the committee B-Sage – pronouncing it beige. Sage’s advice was released on Monday after the prime minister made clear in a press conference that he had rejected a national circuit breaker in favour of a three-tier system of restrictions. Vallance believed it would be helpful to publish the Sage advice as soon as possible, the Guardian understands. The senior Conservative MP Bernard Jenkin, who chairs the powerful liaison committee of MPs, suggested on Monday that a “short, sharp shock” may be necessary. The idea of a circuit breaker was also backed by metro mayors in northern England provided it came with more financial support than is currently on the table. The mayors of Greater Manchester, the Sheffield city region and North of Tyne represent a combined 5.5 million people. Andy Burnham, mayor of Greater Manchester, said he would prefer a nationwide circuit breaker to tier 3 (“very high risk”) measures because it “would be much more effective, come with proper financial support and allow the reset of test and trace”. “A winter in tier 3 would kill us,” he said. “We are not there yet.” Dan Jarvis, Labour MP for Barnsley Central and mayor for the Sheffield city region, said he could support a circuit breaker “provided it comes with an accompanying economic support package”. He admitted that local directors of public health in South Yorkshire were already agitating for tougher measures. Jamie Driscoll, mayor of the North of Tyne, said he would be prepared to support a circuit breaker providing there was evidence to show it would work and if it came with additional funds. “We’ve got to get on top of the virus. It’s got to be evidence-based. If the evidence says a further lockdown’s going to work then it needs to come with support,” he said. Some health experts in the north-west continue to argue for tougher restrictions beyond the Liverpool city region – the only area in tier 3. One director of public health in a tier 2 area said she would prefer a national circuit breaker, pointing out they had been subject to restrictions for several months yet infections had soared. “We are not a big enough country for local lockdowns to work and the local nature of these restrictions exacerbates north-south inequalities,” she said. The Welsh first minister, Mark Drakeford, has urged Johnson to call a meeting of the emergency Cobra committee to discuss the possibility of a short UK-wide lockdown. In a letter to the prime minister, he said: “We should discuss collectively what circuit breaker options might best serve to bring the virus – and the R number – under control across the UK.” Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, said she did not rule out introducing a fourth tier of restrictions. “You can go soft and try to hedge your bets, and the danger is you end up inflicting the economic harm but not having the public health impact,” she said. London’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, welcomed Starmer’s proposal, tweeting: “A short, national ‘circuit break’ – as advised by the experts on Sage – will save lives, protect the NHS and support our economic recovery.” Johnson’s spokesman said that before rejecting much of the Sage advice in September, the prime minister and his chancellor, Rishi Sunak, sought “a wide variety of scientific opinion, alongside extensive engagement with scientific and medical advisers, and the chief economist”. Asked why the circuit breaker idea was not acted on, the spokesman said the documents also carried advice about seeking a broader perspective. “They explicitly point out that policymakers will need to consider analysis of economic impact and the associated harms, alongside their epidemiological assessment, and that’s exactly what the prime minister, the chancellor and colleagues did,” he said. Asked if this meant Johnson had lost confidence in Sage, the spokesman said the committee “continues to provide the prime minister with advice”.