“I just thank God that I wasn’t totally new to the ITU. I was used to being busy but it was a controlled busy and manageable. But when Covid-19 came everything changed. None of us were prepared – how could we be, we’d never faced anything like it. The biggest shock was the full PPE and in addition for part of it I was observing Ramadan so not eating or drinking. To be honest we were all so busy that you hadn’t got time to think about stuff like food. None of us were prepared – how could we be, we’d never faced anything like it I found dealing with the death toll very, very hard, I think we were all quite traumatised. But we came together as a team and being able to debrief with each other was incredibly important. It was an emotional time and we cried but we also had constant support and reassurance from our matron and we felt valued and supported by the community. For me as well my family and my neighbours really lifted me up. They gave me my space but would also check I was OK. I think we are a lot more prepared mentally and physically now but there is a weight in my heart if I close my eyes and think back.” Photograph, l-r: Claire Nolan, senior sister, emergency department; Isabel Completo Silva, scrub nurse; Sarah Mabahena, healthcare assistant; Maria Villar-Otero, theatres healthcare assistant; Gina Chowdhury, ITU nurse “We soon discovered we didn’t just need ventilators, but also machines to filtrate the kidneys and scanners for the brain, as every part of our patients’ bodies was being affected. I’m so proud of my team. I know they were stressed and scared but if people got sick or had to self-isolate, others immediately stepped forward to take their place We also had to learn very quickly how to communicate better with all the families who weren’t allowed to come to our hospitals to see their loved ones. They were so anxious and we discovered that every word from us had an impact on them so it was vital to get it right. I’m so proud of my team. I know they were stressed and scared but if people got sick or had to self-isolate, others immediately stepped forward to take their place. Rotas changed continually and we had to learn how to work in PPE which was a challenge both for us and our patients. Luckily the trust was incredibly responsive and provided us with all the resources we asked for. It feels good to know that all the protocols, plans and guidance are in place now, whatever the future holds.” Photograph, l-r: Amna Khan, OPD; Shatha Haemeed, consultant anaesthetist and clinical director for anaesthetics, ITU, theatres and pre-operative assessment; Talat Mumtaz, anaesthetist; Jay Mukherjee, consultant anaesthetist; Jayshree Virji, emergency department nurse; Muhammad Shahid, orthopaedic consultant; Angeli Santiago, scrub nurse. “We went from your standard run of the mill into total oblivion. It was a case of dropping the red tape and worrying about the paperwork later. We needed three times the amount of linen and scrubs that were held in stock and we had to find a way – immediately. We also had to find space for all the additional beds and mattresses. It was a case of whatever it took to do the job and if that meant starting at 6am in the morning then that’s what we did. I just think it’s important that people recognise it takes a lot of cogs for the big wheels to turn There wasn’t a moment to stop and we had a lot going on. I remember bringing the mortuary freezers to the car park and I found that quite difficult as you knew what that signified but then 15 minutes later once we’d finished that job I was clapping a 96-year-old as he left the hospital having beaten the virus. It was like that regularly – one extreme to the other. I’ve been nothing but impressed by my team but if people ask if I’m surprised, no I’m not. That’s the NHS and that’s what we do, regardless. It’s about our patients and we do what needs to be done. I just think it’s important that people recognise it takes a lot of cogs for the big wheels to turn.” Photograph, l-r: front row: Jessica Miller, consultant in anaesthesia and intensive care and critical care lead; Sadiya Abdullah, emergency department nurse; Grishma Moray, senior house officer emergency medicine; Barbara Gatulah, junior sister ITU; Cassie Fagelman, service manager. Middle row: Connor McGinty, domestic assistant; Clifford Lisk, consultant in acute and geriatric medicine; Ravzan-Ionel Goldum, security officer; Priti Dutta, interventional radiology consultant; David Williams, porter. Back row: Darren Burton, senior estates and project officer; Faycel Derbeli, porter; Fol Lawanson, pharmacy assistant technical officer; Anisa Saeed, midwife “There was a buildup of anxiety at the start – we didn’t know when it could hit but we saw what was happening in Italy, where the whole system broke down. It was a relief that that never happened here. It felt like the 7 July bombing, only it went on for a month instead of just one day Wearing PPE for a 12-hour shift is really difficult for the ED doctors and nurses. But then you would always think that whatever we were facing, there were others coping with something more difficult. For example, those working on the ICU had it really tough with the number of desperately sick patients they were dealing with every day. But it did remind me of some of the major incidents we have faced in the past. It felt like the 7 July bombing, only it went on for a month instead of just one day.” Photograph, l-r, Fifth row: Charlotte Greenfield, critical care physiotherapist; Kyle Harding, emergency department service manager. Fourth row: Neal Banga, consultant renal transplant and endocrine surgeon; Taina Karppinen, matron; Ashley Baruah, senior nurse for practice and education; Paul Clarke, health care assistant; Amy Pritchard, chief nuclear medicine technologist; Karthiha Subramaniam, business analyst. Third row: Rodrigo Santiago, security officer; Sajeev Thomas, systems commissioning technician; Dinesh Aggarwal, infectious diseases specialist registrar; Kulwant Dhadwal, clinical lead, ICU; Dentor Ubalde, deputy clinical operations manager - patient flow. Second row: Vicky Cowling, emergency medicine registrar; Helen Box, switchboard operator; Keiko Mizoguchi Sastre, catering assistant; Vicky Pang, head of infection prevention & control, nursing. Front row: Sarisha Maxwell, emergency department supervisor; Mei-Lian Hoe, anaesthetist; Tabitha Mahungu, consultant virologist and infectious diseases physician, clinical lead for virology; Andrew Kerr, patient services porter “Our elective service was cut back to nothing and we decided we wanted to support the trust in whatever way we could. We had a residual trauma service but the rest of the time we were helping in other ways like turning (proning) the patients, supporting ED with the referral process and taking patients for scans. What was great was our trauma and orthopaedics WhatsApp group – 60 or 70 people – including nurses and healthcare assistants – which meant everyone had a say I hadn’t worked nights for 20 years but and I don’t mind admitting I was nervous because I had to find out how systems worked. I found it rewarding though because I could see the problems people were facing and then could do my best to try and solve them. What was great was our trauma and orthopaedics WhatsApp group – 60 or 70 people – including nurses and healthcare assistants – which meant everyone had a say. I’m very proud of the team – people were understandably nervous but they overcame their fears and did a good job. I think they are to be commended for that. Photograph, l-r: Nazri Unni, consultant in intensive care medicine; Ndumiso Ndebele, general nurse; Sarah Milne, lead nurse nephrology; Cherryl Dris, recovery practitioner; Nick Garlick, consultant orthopaedic surgeon; Sanjoy Saha, consultant anaesthetist; Sudeepta Hemraj, emergency department specialist registrar “When we saw what was happening in Italy we stayed up late developing plans and strategies, working across disciplines and creating working groups of consultants and trainee anaesthetists to ensure we were prepared. We grew stronger together, we learned from one another and we inspired one another – it was the true spirit of the NHS As doctors, we are used to analysing situations and reaching conclusions. We are pretty good at calculating outcomes in various circumstances. This time, however, it was impossible to speculate. We simply did not know how bad it was going to get.” The team used walkie-talkies to transmit commands between the centre and ‘rapid response teams’, formed of anaesthetists and other clinicians. “The rapid response teams were like families. We all knew each other and formed strong bonds, supporting each other from a professional and personal perspective. We were the frontline soldiers fighting an invisible enemy. But we grew stronger together, we learned from one another and we inspired one another – it was the true spirit of the NHS.” Photograph: l-r, back row: Nikunj Depala, senior musculoskeletal physiotherapist; Stefan Sevastru, consultant anaesthetist; Timmy O’Donoghue, emergency department senior charge nurse. Front row: Linda Lee, student doctor; Lovely Begum, junior ward manager (adult ambulatory unit); Teresita Dimala, facilities service assistant; Janet Wright, estates workforce operations manager; Tania Viana Marquez, aspirant nurse; Moses Alvarado, catering assistant “It was a difficult time but it was brilliant to be able to help – I always felt that it was important to do everything in my power to support everyone else and deliver what was needed from our team. In turn other teams supported us – for example the doctors and nurses were fantastic at giving us the training for the donning and doffing and wearing the masks in ITU. As a team of porters and as the NHS family we came together and supported one another “Looking forward I think we’re well prepared for a second wave but of course it’s not going to be easy. There were many deaths and that was hard for all the staff to comprehend and deal with, but as a team of porters and as the NHS family we came together and supported one another. Managers were always checking in with us and asking us how we were feeling and that meant a lot. I think we can take pride in what we have achieved so far. Photograph, clockwise from top left: Jane Lobo; Sam Hoskins, operations manager for trauma and orthopaedics, pain management and podiatry; Laura Mitchell, midwife; Helder Landim, porters supervisor; Simran Arora, clinical lead dietitian; Gifty Doudou, domestic assistant; Suhanthi Neelan, team leader, pharmacy production; Ardito Widjono, locum junior doctor; Bart Rabas, restaurant supervisor; Sophie Cakebread, lead nurse specialist palliative care; Thulitha Ranapanada, coffee shop barista “We were looking at the experiences of Italy and China and could see that we were going to have to prepare for what was coming our way. So we started early, planning new working arrangements, running simulation training, deriving new guidelines and processes. We were no longer just working in theatres, but also in ICU caring for critically unwell patients, alongside intensivists. We were also leading intubation teams on wards and in the emergency department, leading proning teams and helping transfer critically unwell patients for investigations and treatments. I am pleased that the first peak of this pandemic has passed and I am back doing my usual job in theatres. However, as a team, we remain on high alert and prepared if the situation escalates.” Photograph: l-r, Rosie Garingo, healthcare assistant, Elaine Dalziel, staff nurse, Collins Boadi, junior charge nurse, Dorota Filipowicz, senior pharmacy assistant, Meritxell Miret, trainee anatomical pathology technologist, Shane McDonald, service manager for diabetes and endocrinology and respiratory medicine, Marta Campbell, consultant anaesthetist