Rudy Giuliani, the personal attorney to Donald Trump and former mayor of New York city, threatened to walk out of a tense interview on Fox Business. Recently embarrassed by his appearance in a compromising scene the new Borat movie, Giuliani was being pressed on the provenance of stories about what is claimed to be Hunter Biden’s laptop. The host, Lisa Kennedy Montgomery, suggested the stories emanating from the “found” laptop and reported by the New York Post were similar to the kind of broad smear that the famed Christopher Steele dossier made about Donald Trump. This angered Giuliani, who said: “You better apologise for that! I’ve been a United States attorney, associate attorney general, mayor of New York City and a member of the bar for 50 years.” Describing the suggestion as an “outrageous defamation” and accusing the host of “repeating lying propaganda”, he then angrily said: “I think our interview is now over. I don’t talk to people who accuse me.” Emails purporting to come from the laptop make the suggestion that a Ukrainian business partner contacted Hunter Biden about setting up a meeting with his father, the Democratic presidential nominee, Joe Biden. The laptop and emails have not been independently verified, and the New York Post is yet to produce any evidence that Hunter Biden replied to the email, or that any meeting took place. During the interview Giuliani made the point that both Fox and the New York Post were owned by Rupert Murdoch, taunting his interviewer by saying: “Do you think Rupert Murdoch would let them print false material?” “Heavens, no,” came the rather dry reply. Giuliani was also asked about his unwitting contribution to Sacha Baron Cohen’s movie, in which it seemed that the 76-year-old was prepared to enter into sexual activity with an actor playing Borat’s daughter. Montgomery, who goes by the name of Kennedy on screen, said: “I have a 15-year-old daughter, I watched that, I was kinda grossed out by it.” Giuliani again claimed that during the moment that some people think shows him touching his genitals he was merely tucking in his shirt while lying down on a bed. The interview has not gone down brilliantly with all of Fox’s viewers, with Kennedy tweeting that it had led to viewers calling her a “traitor”, “loser” and “literally a piece of shiii”. Giuliani ended the segment by saying: “I have not loved this conversation. I find this conversation totally insulting.”