Michael McCarthy’s introduction to The Consolation of Nature: Spring in the Time of Coronavirus (Nature got us through lockdown. Here’s how it can get us through the next one, 3 October) is a powerful and moving reflection on the solace brought by nature and its power as a balm for stressed-out lives. The importance of nature to our health and wellbeing has been known for many years, and the experience of lockdown has heightened our awareness of this as never before. The anger at the closure of public parks, for example, and the relief when they reopened, was a glimpse into this renewed appreciation. Yet, as McCarthy points out, access to green space is unevenly distributed, with millions, especially in poorer areas, missing out. The government’s planning proposals are likely to make things worse. The housing secretary, Robert Jenrick, claims that his plans will result in homes with green spaces and new parks close at hand, yet there’s no detail on how this will be delivered. Existing permitted development rights have resulted in developers building homes where barely 20% meet recommended minimum space standards, so it’s hardly likely that the blank cheque that Jenrick is giving builders will result in the green space he claims. That’s why it’s time to establish a new right to green space close to where we live. No new housing development should be sanctioned more than a kilometre from public green space. I’ve just tabled an early day motion calling on the government to put people’s health and wellbeing, and a right of access to nature, at the heart of planning reform. I urge MPs to sign it and ministers to act.Caroline Lucas MPGreen party, Brighton Pavilion • Hedgerows have more value as hedges than as a line of trees (Letters, 30 September). Their ecological benefits derive from being managed to maintain a valuable habitat for birds, butterflies and mammals. Too many trees provide lookouts for predators such as carrion crows and buzzards, which prey on ground-nesting birds. Maintained hedgerows also have cultural landscape significance, and rather than cut them annually, farmers are now starting to trim them every two or three years. A tree every 20 metres would make this take longer, increasing CO2 emissions.Rob YorkeAbergavenny, Monmouthshire