A social media campaign calling for the release of 12 Hong Kong youths detained in China is gaining ground, with support from international activists including Greta Thunberg. The teenage environmentalist is among a growing list of international activists, campaigners and politicians sharing the hashtag #save12HKyouths, hoping to draw international attention to the plight of 12 young people held under tight security in mainland China after they were caught allegedly trying to flee Hong Kong by boat. "12" is more than just a number.I’ve been nominated by @joshuawongcf to join this campaign. Post a picture of #SAVE12 & #SAVE12HKYOUTHS and tag 3 friends to spread the word.I nominate @Luisamneubauer , @NakabuyeHildaF , and @Jamie_Margolin to join.@save12hkyouths https://t.co/GpgShLaAav pic.twitter.com/VihzeCMiCC On 23 August Chinese coastguards intercepted a speedboat off the coast of Hong Kong carrying 12 people aged 16 to 30, who were allegedly heading to Taiwan to seek asylum. Almost all the passengers were facing charges relating to the 2019 protest movement, ranging from the ubiquitous “riot” charge, to more serious weapons offences. Among the group was Andy Li, a young activist who had previously been arrested under the national security law on suspicion of foreign collusion. A leading Hong Kong activist, Joshua Wong, said one was a Portuguese national and two held British National Overseas passports. Families told media they did not know of the arrest until five days later. Hong Kong police appeared to also learn of the arrest via media reports, although later revelations of a Hong Kong surveillance aircraft in the vicinity of the boat’s departure point on the morning they left have raised questions. In late September Chinese authorities formally approved the arrest the group – 10 members for illegally crossing the Chinese border and two members for organising it. Chinese authorities have been accused of denying the group access to lawyers, advocates, medicine, and contact with their loved ones while they are held in Yantian people’s procuratorate in Shenzhen. Chinese authorities claimed the detainees had chosen mainland lawyers from a list of government recommendations, but this has been disputed, with some lawyers and family members of the detained questioning whether they have any representation at all. Mainland lawyers, including several who specialise in human rights cases, have accused the Chinese authorities of pressuring them to stop representing their clients. The Hong Kong 12 have become the latest flashpoint for protesters in Hong Kong and the pro-democracy movement’s international diaspora. Wong has accused the Hong Kong government of colluding with the mainland authorities to “kidnap” the group, and put activists in greater danger within the Chinese legal system, over a matter which was in Hong Kong’s jurisdiction.