At first glance, French photographer Thomas Morel-Fort’s work has all the trappings of a modern-day fairytale: princesses in lavish Parisian mansions; holidays in hilltop villas on the Côte d’Azur; promises of wealth and prosperity. But his photographs reveal a grittier reality. Morel-Fort’s lens instead alights on the unseen Cinderellas, the Filipino women hired to cook, clean, iron, babysit and obey any commands that come their way, completely beholden to the whims of their demanding, powerful employers. An estimated 50,000 people from the Philippines are believed to be living and working in France, the vast majority of whom lack official work permits. Most of them are women, serving as nannies and domestic employees for rich Gulf families who divide their time between Paris, the French Riviera and the Middle East. The Filipino community in Paris is close-knit: at night many gather to chat, eat and drink; a Miss Filipino of Paris is elected during annual celebrations to mark the independence of the Philippines; mass is held each Sunday Yet the trappings of wealth that surround them can mask an underbelly of exploitation and abuse. Overseas domestic workers are recognised as one of the most vulnerable to being mistreated by their employers. Behind the closed doors of luxury apartments and seaside mansions, some will work without receiving their pay, have their passports confiscated and be unable to seek help. Six years ago, Morel-Fort, 35, was living in Paris’s swish 16th arrondissement – home to celebrated museums, gated villas and the Arc de Triomphe – when he noticed a number of Filipinas looking after children in the parks and cafes. After he chanced upon a group of them in the metro one day, he approached the women, curious to find out what had drawn them to the city. It was an interaction that would ultimately change the way he viewed his own country. Over the course of the following year, Morel-Fort became friends with some of the women, chatting to them about the families they had left behind in the Philippines and their precarious new lives in France. As he helped them open bank accounts and clean too-high-to-reach windows in palatial appartements, he did not pick up his camera once, preferring instead to establish mutual trust. Eventually he began documenting their lives, focusing in particular on two women: Donna, 42, and Jhen, 37. He photographed them cleaning houses, Facebooking their young children back home and socialising within the close-knit Filipino community. “They’ve left everything they know – their country, their children – to take care of other people’s families and houses,” says Morel-Fort, who says his series Filipinas is a tribute to their accomplishments. “They have these hard lives for a reason: to send money home to improve their own families’ future.” Gathered on the doorstep of their home in the Philippines, Donna’s family wait for her phone call. Donna’s mother is tearful – she understands what her daughter is going through because she too worked abroad in her youth For Donna, who grew up poor in a rural mountain village with a dream of one day becoming a nurse, life has entailed a series of compromises to give her four children the opportunities she never had. In 2012, she paid a smuggler €13,000 (£11,800) to bring her to Europe, arriving first in Denmark before settling in Paris. She has not returned home since. Just last year, her 21-year-old daughter became the first person in the family to graduate from university. “I’m very proud of my daughter. It was my own dream to become a nurse, and now I finally did it with my daughter,” she says. “It’s very hard being away from my children, but I am proud of my sacrifice. As Filipinas, we’re used to being far from our families because so many of us are working abroad […but] you are always thinking about your family.” In 2016, one of Donna’s employers, a wealthy Gulf family who spent their summers on the Côte d’Azur, asked her to recruit a friend to join the housekeeping staff. Morel-Fort offered to take the job himself. By the time they realised he was a man and French it was too late to find someone else, he says. The experience of being embedded in a “clandestine villa” where “no one would ever know what was going on inside” was eye-opening, says Morel-Fort, who found himself working alongside undocumented north Africans who were still waiting to be paid for their work the summer before. He found that the family were erratic not only with their payments but with their requests as well: after staff spent three days filling the swimming pool, they were forced to empty it with buckets in the middle of the night simply because “the family didn’t like the colour of the water”. Among the large staff of Filipino and north African employees, Morel-Fort was the only one with legal status to live and work in France. He spent the first six weeks gaining the trust of the workers, and only photographed them with their consent (the family never discovered that he was a photographer). What he witnessed in the villa, he says, was clearly exploitation. The family wielded their power over their staff relentlessly. “The villa was a microcosm where the only rules that applied were those dictated by monsieur and madame,” he says. “We were on call at all hours, we didn’t know when we would start or finish, or if we would ever be paid. The lights are turned off because her Donna’s employers haven’t paid their bills; she walks the dogs of a French actress – a side job; resting after cleaning a huge apartment; taking care of her employer’s sister’s baby “I had heard a lot of stories about what [life as a domestic employee] was like because I’d been working on this story for a year by then, but I really didn’t expect such behaviour in France. Seeing with my own eyes the working conditions of these Filipino women convinced me to continue documenting their lives.” Morel-Fort’s photographs – accumulated over the course of six years, documenting Filipinas at work, at home and in their community – are at their most powerful as an indictment of the human cost of globalisation. There is Jhen in her tiny maid’s room (which she will eventually leave as she can no longer afford the rent) juxtaposed with the huge mansion of her employer (a Saudi princess); Donna as she changes the nappy of one boss’s baby, contrasted with her blue-lit portrait as she video chats her own children, whom she has not seen in person in eight years. Donna’s children spend a lot of time together and sleep in the same room in their home in the Philippines. Using their phones quells their boredom and compensates for their lack of privacy An estimated 10.2 million people from the Philippines – 10% of the nation’s population – are currently working abroad, according to the Commission on Filipinos Overseas. Their remittances were valued at $30.1bn (£23.21bn) in 2019, roughly 10% of the country’s GDP. Yet Morel-Fort’s photos force us to examine the high social cost behind the economics. “Not one of the women I photographed has been able to go back and see her family, because they don’t have visas and they’d have to get smuggled back [into Europe],” says Morel-Fort, who travelled to the Philippines to spend time with Jhen and Donna’s families after winning the 2019 Camille Lepage award. Jhen works for a Saudi princess in the 16th arrondissement; her daughter, Jennidel, became pregnant at 17, which – in a country that doesn’t permit abortion – could spell the end of her schooling; Jhen’s husband works as a traffic warden in Manila; Jhen hasn’t seen in her children seven years, but tries to keep in touch “In these situations where the woman goes overseas, it’s the husband [left behind] who ends up taking care of the family. But it’s very patriarchal. Even if he works, his salary is nothing compared to what the wife sends home. He has a hard time finding his place. And it’s complicated for the kids: they haven’t seen their mother for years and they don’t really understand all that she has sacrificed for them.” For Donna, the fairytale dream of earning more money and enabling successful futures for her children is undercut by the everyday limbo of her life in Paris. “After eight years here, I still have no papers, because I need a sponsor who will declare me and unfortunately all this time I have been working part-time [for various employers],” she says. “I’m worried about getting caught by the police. Many Filipinos have already been deported straight back home. It’s a matter of being careful, everywhere, all the time.” Three generations of women in Donna’s family back in the Philippines. Having obtained her nursing diploma, Donna’s daughter Nicole, 21, dreams of working abroad