George Ford has emerged as an injury doubt for England’s Six Nations finale against Italy a week on Saturday, potentially forcing Eddie Jones into an overhaul of his midfield for the crucial trip to Rome. Ford has been ruled out of the uncapped Barbarians game on Sunday with a pre‑existing achilles problem and has withdrawn from the Teddington camp. It is understood England are confident he will be fit to take part in the Autumn Nations Cup, which begins against Georgia on 7 November, but less so over the rescheduled Italy match. The 27-year-old sustained the injury towards the back end of Leicester’s season and he will be assessed again by England’s medical staff at the start of next week before a decision on his availability against Italy is made. If he is ruled out it would be a blow for Jones, who has selected Ford in 53 of his 54 matchday squads. If Ford does miss out it would mean moving the captain, Owen Farrell, from inside-centre to fly-half and, given he is the only specialist No 10 left in the current squad, he may well make the move against the Barbarians. Jones is already without Manu Tuilagi for the match in Rome and Jones could have to turn to a new‑look centre pairing for a match in which they will be seeking to boost their points difference in pursuit of the Six Nations title. Henry Slade is set for a return to the fold after the Premiership final on Saturday but he will have to get up to speed quickly while Jones has talked up the potential of Worcester’s powerful young centre Ollie Lawrence. Jones has been able to add the Bristol trio of Kyle Sinckler, Ben Earl and Max Malins, who has impressed on loan from Saracens since the Premiership restart, after it was confirmed that Wasps had received the all clear to face Exeter on Saturday, meaning Pat Lam’s players were no longer on standby. England supporters have been told they cannot attend the match in Rome despite the Italian government allowing 1,000 fans into the stadium. Those tickets will be taken by Italy’s corporate clients with England fans able to claim a refund. England top the Six Nations table but Ireland will move above them if they beat Italy with a bonus point on Saturday before the competition’s climax on 31 October.