 Tue 27 Oct 2020 12.30 GMT The Glenlivet has never been afraid to mix things up. Ever since founder George Smith put his mark on the Speyside style of whisky almost 200 years ago, doing things differently has been at the heart of the brand – and it’s a philosophy that extends to the many ways this premium single malt can be enjoyed. The Caribbean tartan tiki cocktail, for instance, is a bold take on a tropical-themed serve. Traditionally made with rum, the classic tiki gets a smooth, single malt upgrade with The Glenlivet Caribbean Reserve – and the prizewinner will get all the ingredients needed to make it at home, including: A 70cl bottle of The Glenlivet Caribbean Reserve Two bottles of soda An orange A mini bottle of Angostura Bitters Pineapple juice Two The Glenlivet branded glasses Simply enter your details below for the chance to win. Discover moreFor more recipes, visit theglenlivet.com/en-UK/the-serves-and-mixesJoin the Glenlivet community at theglenlivet.com/en-UK/our-community/join-us 1. The Glenlivet prize draw (the “Prize Draw”) is open to residents of the UK aged 18 and over. 2. The Prize Draw is not open to employees or agencies of Guardian News & Media Limited (“GNM” or the “Promoter”), their group companies or family members, freelance contributors to GNM, or anyone else connected to the Prize Draw. 3. Entrants into the Prize Draw shall be deemed to have accepted these Terms and Conditions. 4. To enter the Prize Draw you must complete the entry form, providing us with your name, email address and phone number. No purchase is necessary. If you have any questions about how to enter or otherwise in connection with the Prize Draw, please email us at labs.project.management@guardian.co.uk with “The Glenlivet Prize Draw” in the subject line. 5. Only one entry per person. Entries on behalf of another person will not be accepted and joint submissions are not allowed. You are responsible for the cost (if any) of sending your Prize Draw entry to us. The winner shall be the owner of the email address from which the selected winning entry is sent. 6. GNM accepts no responsibility for entries that are lost, delayed, misdirected or incomplete or cannot be delivered or entered for any technical or other reason. Proof of delivery of the entry is not proof of receipt by GNM. 7. The Prize Draw opens at 12:30 on 27 October 2020 and closes at 23:59 on 31 December 2020. Entries received outside this time period will not be considered. 8. The winner will receive 1 x 70cl bottle of The Glenlivet Caribbean Reserve; 2 x bottles of soda; Orange; 1 x mini bottle of Angostura Bitters; Pineapple juice; 2x The Glenlivet branded glasses. 9. Only one winner per household. GNM accepts no responsibility for any costs associated with the prize that are not expressly included in the prize. 10. The winner will be selected by way of a random draw from all entries received in accordance with these Terms and Conditions. The draw will take place on or after 4 January 2021. 11. The winner will be notified by email on or after 6 January 2021 and given details of how to claim their prize. If a winner does not respond to GNM within 14 days of being notified of their win, the winner’s prize will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner in accordance with the process described above (and that winner will have to respond to notification of their win within 14 days or else they will also forfeit their prize). If a winner rejects their prize or the entry is invalid or in breach of these terms, the winner’s prize will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner. 12. The prize will be sent to the winner by Pernod Ricard by 30 January 2021. 13. The name and county of the winner can be obtained after 30 January 2021 by sending a stamped addressed envelope to the following address: Guardian Labs, Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, N1 9GU. 14. The prize is non-exchangeable, non-transferable and not redeemable for cash or any other prize. 15. GNM reserves the right to substitute the prize with an alternative prize of similar value in the event that the original prize offered is not available. 16. The winner may be required to take part in promotional activity related to the Prize Draw and the winner shall participate in such activity on the Promoter’s reasonable request. The winner consents to the use by the Promoter and its related companies, both before and after the closing date of the Prize Draw for an unlimited time, of the winner’s voice, image, photograph and name for publicity purposes (in any medium, including still photographs and films, and on the internet, including any websites hosted by the Promoter and its related companies) and in advertising, marketing or promotional material without additional compensation or prior notice and, in entering the Prize Draw, all entrants consent to the same. 17. The Promoter shall use and take care of any personal information you supply to it as described in its privacy policy, a copy of which can be seen at theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy, and in accordance with data protection legislation. By entering the Prize Draw, you agree to the collection, retention, usage and distribution of your personal information in order to process and contact you about your Prize Draw entry, and for the purposes outlined in paragraph 13 above. 18. GNM accepts no responsibility for any damage, loss, liabilities, injury or disappointment incurred or suffered by you as a result of entering the Prize Draw or accepting the prize. GNM further disclaims liability for any injury or damage to your or any other person’s computer relating to or resulting from participation in or downloading any materials in connection with the Prize Draw. Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall exclude the liability of GNM under law for fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation, or for death or personal injury resulting from its negligence. 19. GNM reserves the right at any time and from time to time to modify or discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this Prize Draw with or without prior notice due to reasons outside its reasonable control (including, without limitation, in the case of anticipated, suspected or actual fraud). The decision of GNM in all matters relating to the Prize Draw is final and no correspondence will be entered into. 20. GNM shall not be liable for any failure to comply with its obligations relating to this Prize Draw where the failure is caused by something outside its reasonable control. Such circumstances shall include, but not be limited to, weather conditions, fire, flood, hurricane, strike, industrial dispute, war, hostilities, political unrest, riots, civil commotion, inevitable accidents, supervening legislation or any other circumstances amounting to force majeure. 21. The Prize Draw and these Terms and Conditions will be governed by English law and entrants to the Prize Draw submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of the English courts. 22. Promoter: Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, N1 9GU.