The contrast of emotions on the touchline could not have been clearer. As Oriol Romeu exquisitely volleyed in to double Southampton’s advantage, Slaven Bilic, who wore a pained look throughout, stood forlorn, arms folded. A few yards to his left, a beaming Ralph Hasenhüttl exchange a high-five with his assistant, Richard Kitzbichler. This was another satisfying workout for Southampton, who shared the goals around as they swept aside a porous West Brom on a dank afternoon courtesy of brilliant strikes by Romeu and Moussa Djenepo. Djenepo opened the scoring after nonchalantly turning away from Jake Livemore, the West Brom captain, before drilling a left-footed strike into the corner. West Brom improved after the half-time introduction of Sam Field in place of Kyle Edwards, who struggled to make an impression on what was his first Premier League start. But he was not the only one and West Brom, who did at least ask some questions of the Southampton backline in the second half, failed to assert any authority in a one-sided game, much of which the goalkeeper Sam Johnstone spent repelling Southampton chances. He made a superb double save, which culminated in Che Adams being denied from point-blank range after a brilliant break by the excellent Kyle Walker-Peters, who eliminated Conor Townsend after latching on to a flighted Jannik Vestergaard pass, and then brilliantly clawed Danny Ings’s deft header away from danger. Southampton should have won by a bigger margin but Alex McCarthy had to be alert to keep out a low strike by Grady Diangana with an outstretched leg after a quick free-kick routine, while West Brom’s centre-back pairing, Semi Ajayi and Kyle Bartley, passed up an even better chance before Romeu put the game to bed. Bilic remains desperate to bolster his front line – Islam Slimani and Karlan Grant are believed to be on their radar and how Albion could have done with a striker’s instinct when Matheus Pereira’s whipped free-kick flew towards the penalty spot. First Ajayi and then Bartley tried and failed to convert from close range, much to Southampton’s relief.