Another week, another big win for Arsenal, now the only side with a 100% record and doing it in style. They are battering teams – this was their second 6-1 win, to add to last week’s 5-0 victory over Brighton and a 9-1 thrashing of West Ham – and if the league does go down to the wire they are already well placed, with a significant goal difference advantage. Vivienne Miedema scored a first-half hat-trick to move ahead of Nikita Parris and become the WSL’s all-time leading scorer and the Gunners are profiting from having a good group of players – Beth Mead, Katie McCabe, Kim Little, Danielle van de Donk – who have been at the club long enough to develop that understanding and synchronicity that good players get over time. Miedema will get the headlines and rightly so, as one of the most natural goalscorers I’ve ever seen, but McCabe has been another of their standout players this season – she has transformed herself since she signed at the end of 2015, her fitness and sharpness has improved and her natural skill is coming through. She has been converted to a left-back by Joe Montemurro, and with the marauding right-back Lisa Evans out through injury McCabe has helped to make up for it by doing a similar job on the other side, and scored a wonderful free-kick on Sunday. West Ham and Manchester United both drew their first league game of the season 1-1, but since then the Hammers have lost every match and United have won them all. I’ve loved seeing Alessia Russo getting so much playing time for United after coming back to England from the United States. She is a different kind of striker to the other options England have – tall but pacey, so a threat at set-pieces with her height but also able to run off players. Playing up top with Tobin Heath on one side and either Leah Galton or Christen Press on the other, feeding you the ball, that’s an ideal situation for a striker, and she got two goals, both assisted by Galton, on Sunday. Heath got her first WSL goal, and is starting to show her finest qualities in a United shirt. What really pleases me with the WSL’s influx of Americans is that their 100% work-rate is non-negotiable. Grit, hard work, absolute effort is a given, and then they get the best out of their talent as well. You feel some superstar names might come to a new country and just enjoy the limelight and the adulation for a while, but they are absolutely putting a shift in. It wasn’t a complete disaster for West Ham, who did respond after going two goals down, but after getting back to 2-1 they fell further behind. They are clearly low on confidence but they have a couple of senior internationals in Emily van Egmond and Rachel Daly who might be the leaders they need to haul them out of trouble. Germany, Belgium and the Netherlands have announced their joint bid to host the 2027 Women's World Cup. The three national FAs have presented their plans to Fifa, and will draft more detailed plans including potential host cities in the next few months. Germany hosted the 2011 World Cup, while the Netherlands hosted and won Euro 2017 (pictured). "Women's football is known worldwide for its strong sense of community," a joint statement said. "All parties involved have an eye on the bigger picture and that is taking the sport to the next level. "Although the development of women's football in our individual countries is in different stages, we share the ambition to give the sport a huge boost, both nationally and internationally." The next World Cup in 2023 will be held in Australia and New Zealand, after France hosted the 2019 edition. This is the first official bid to host the 2027 World Cup, with Italy and a joint Nordic countries bid among other potential candidates. Germany are currently ranked second in the world, with the Netherlands in fourth. Belgium are ranked 17th, with their only major tournament appearance to date coming at Euro 2017. PA Media Just like the men’s team, Everton’s run of wins ended with a 2-2 draw and a player controversially not being sent off. This time it was one of their opponents who got away without a red card, after Brighton’s Kayleigh Green was booked twice but stayed on the pitch. It is a simply unbelievable mistake for a referee to make, and if you’re still compiling a list of why we need better officials in the WSL, here was another entry. Willie Kirk, the Everton coach, was furious, and in a close-fought match there’s no doubt it could have been the difference between victory and frustration. Danielle Turner hit a post late on, and you would have fancied Everton to put the game to bed if they had a player advantage. Valérie Gauvin scored Everton’s second goal with a header, and that is the kind of goal she is going to become very well known for, because she is absolutely exceptional with her head. I remember Karen Walker, who played for England 20 years ago and was so tall, so powerful, and her execution of headers was unbelievable. It is a rare skillset in women’s football, but in Gauvin Everton have a player who seems to have that, and every time a cross comes in you feel with her around there’s a chance it will end up in the net. After an awkward start to the season when they put four past Spurs a couple of weeks ago Manchester City seemed to have gelled, but they have got one point from two games since and have gone back to disappointing us again. It’s like there’s a fault in the circuit, when a circuit needs every element to be perfect if it’s to work properly. They had 26 shots to Reading’s three, but fell behind to Amelie Eikeland’s goal in the third minute and after that were always fighting. To concede the way they did, from a set piece a few minutes in, reeks of a lack of concentration, and after that Grace Moloney made some top saves and Reading showed why they have been pretty hard to beat. Kelly Chambers has almost had to rebuild their character after the departure of a few longstanding players, and after a while when they lacked a collective character they have become that gritty, organised, confident, tactically astute team again. Bristol’s game against Birmingham looked like a potentially key basement battle, between two teams widely expected to be in the potential relegation battle. In the end it was a bit of a demolition job, with a Birmingham team that I have repeatedly praised in recent weeks again showing their quality and winning 4-0. Carla Ward has done an amazing job with them, developing a real sense of identity and confidence. They brought their A game when they played top teams earlier in the season and it wasn’t enough, but they have remained at that level against teams of lesser quality and completely rolled them over. This will be such a massive boost – not just the points, but to see that their philosophy, the work they are putting in on the training ground, is bearing fruit and delivering convincing victories. In Rachel Corsie and Christie Murray they have two senior players, longstanding Scotland internationals, whose experience can bridge the gap for all the youngsters Birmingham have had to bring in. They have been such important, shrewd signings, and the work that has gone in off the pitch cannot be praised highly enough. Watch the biggest season of women’s football yet on BT Sport, with at least 22 live Barclays FA WSL matches across the season, with more fixtures to be confirmed soon.