The most disturbing show on TV does not involve serial killers, ghosts or malevolent clowns. It has no spooky score or graphic gore (unless you count menstrual blood). Instead, something else seeps terrifyingly from the screen: the relentless, abject horror of life as a 13-year-old girl. From masturbation to manipulative friends, romantic rejection to racist microaggressions, Pen15 leaves no stone unturned when it comes to dredging up the anguish of early adolescence. Yet the trauma is tempered by an absurdist humour: the show sees creators Anna Konkle and Maya Erskine, both very much adults, play their 13-year-old selves among a sea of genuinely teenage peers. It is a combination that has made Pen15 a slowburn sensation in the US. Recently nominated for its first Emmy, it was described by Seth Rogen as “so funny it’s almost maddening”, while Better Call Saul star Bob Odenkirk named it among his top five shows “of all time”. Set at the turn of the millennium, the show catches the fictionalised Maya and Anna at a very awkward moment: no longer girls, not yet women, they still play Sylvanian Families, but also practise snogging in the mirror. Maya is a goofy class clown, Anna is a keen singer with a fractious home life; both have very prominent braces. Neither popular nor social pariahs, they spend most of their lives in hot pursuit of their crushes: tiny young men who brutally reject them at every turn. Initially, the image of these 33-year-old women playing their tweenage selves is ridiculous, recalling the cartoonish comedy Wet Hot American Summer. But as the show progresses their physicality becomes increasingly believable: after all, many 13-year-old girls are saddled with adult bodies before their male counterparts. For Maya this means clumsily trying to disguise the fact she’s got her period, while Anna hunches over self-consciously in order to better match the height of her crush, Alex. A recurring visual gag has schmaltzy ballads playing over slo-mo footage of their very small love interests. “That was my experience growing up as the tall girl: the boys I had crushes on were a foot or two shorter,” says Konkle. For its makers, Pen15 is a bittersweet form of catharsis. Erskine recalls “hysterically crying” while filming certain scenes. “When you’re reliving it, it seems like torture. But it’s also really soothing. It feels like resolution after all of this pain we’ve pushed down.” Konkle agrees. “It can be triggering. It’s a weird social experiment we’ve done to ourselves. In 30 years, I’m going to look back and be like: ‘Well, that fucked me up.’ Or: ‘That was so healing.’ Or somewhere in the middle. Konkle and Erskine are both Zooming in from LA. “We’re roommates!” jokes Konkle, when I ask if they are in the same place (I meant city). “I wish we were,” says Erskine, longingly. The pair didn’t actually know each other at school, but their “really close, intense, wild, funny friendship” provides the foundation for Pen15, a bond reimagined using memories from their respective teenage years. In real life, Konkle spent her childhood on the east coast with “hippy” parents – “There was an earthy, crunchy vibe in my house” – and Erskine in LA, where she lived with her mother and father, a jazz drummer who was in Weather Report. The pair met in Amsterdam during an intensive experimental theatre course that formed part of their studies at New York University. “It was a mix of really admiring her work and then getting to know her and being like: ‘I want to be best friends,’” says Konkle of the attraction. “That happened, thankfully.” After graduating, the pair became jobbing actors in New York (Erskine was a series regular in Insecure, Konkle had a lead role in the police procedural Rosewood). They created a webseries together called Project Reality (now sadly removed from the internet) in which they played “these really odd outcasts. The theme was rejection”. But the plan was always to write something more substantial. Erskine recalls visiting a disenchanted Konkle’s apartment, “and you were like: ‘I might give up [acting], I might go to India. But here’s an idea that I really like.’” What started as a labyrinthine setup involving the pair escaping from “a cult, and then we hide in a foster family and pretend to be kids”, was soon streamlined into the premise for Pen15. The pair poured their most painful Y2K-era experiences into the script. Season one ended with Maya and Anna taking part in a “threesome” (really, some fleeting, fully clothed boob fondling) at the school disco; while season two tracks the fallout, and a wider theme of slut-shaming emerges. We also meet a character nicknamed Icebox, so-called because she is rumoured to have masturbated with an ice cube, a storyline inspired by similar gossip spread about Konkle in her teens. “That was a secret for so long,” she shudders. “Once I got out of my home town, I wanted to pretend it never happened; for most of my life it was like: ‘How far away from this can I get?’” What made her decide to put it on TV? “As I got older I started to talk about it, and every time I would laugh. It’s a genius nickname, unfortunately. It still makes me feel bad a little bit, but we found that’s the sweet spot of content: if it’s scary to talk about and other people have been through it.” For Maya there is private mortification to reckon with: season one covers her secret forays into masturbation, and the social stigma around the issue. Again, this has parallels with Erskine’s experiences. “In real life, Maya’s experiencing sexuality alone, it’s causing shame and she’s hearing kids around her being like: ‘It’s gross if girls masturbate,’” says Konkle. “Then for me, I didn’t experience sexuality and wouldn’t for a really long time – probably because of this rumour.” In season two, Maya and Anna turn on their mums, leading to some relatably messy and hysterical mother-daughter arguments (one climaxes with Maya threatening to call 911 while her mother spanks her in the middle of a clothes shop). “We wanted to be anti-mom, pro-dad,” says Konkle. The fraughtness of the bond is a symptom of its intimacy, reckons Erskine. “When you hate yourself so much [as a teenager] you turn that hate towards your mom because she’s a reflection of yourself. That was why I struggled so much with my mom, because I saw so much of her in me.” In the show, Maya’s mum is played by her real-life mother, Mutsuko. It was a casting decision born of desperation. When trying to find someone to play the character for their pilot, Erskine says, they saw no “authentically Japanese women, and we were just like: ‘This doesn’t feel right. Let’s just try my mom.’” Konkle wasn’t convinced – for good reason. “I had put her in my student films when I was in high school and she was horrible; could not say a line,” says Erskine. “… which is the only story I’d heard about her mum acting and then when we were casting, Maya was like: ‘Maybe my mom?’ And I was like: ‘Yeah … good idea,’” Konkle adds, impersonating her unconvinced former self. “But she’s incredible. I feel so bad that I was so sceptical.” Having your own mother on set is unorthodox enough, but the rest of the cast also required special treatment. Having actual 13-year-olds playing Anna and Maya’s love interests means any remotely sexual content needs to be carefully thought out. “We get really specific about it, even in the writers’ room, because it is so sensitive, we just want everyone to be comfortable,” says Konkle. “We know that we’re already riding a fine line with that. We talk to the actors beforehand and we use adult body doubles and the style of shooting changes.” With its Y2k setting, Pen15 doubles as a heady nostalgia rush fuelled by awful jeans and guileless early internet activity – one episode is dedicated to a friendship formed on AIM (AOL’s instant messaging service). The inherent awkwardness of the era mirrors and reinforces the indignity of adolescence, but it was not a decision based on aesthetics; the pair say they had no choice but to set it in the past. “I wouldn’t know how to begin to do truthful storytelling about being 13 now,” says Konkle. “It’s scary thinking how the internet and phones are affecting that generation.” Truthfulness is a watchword for Pen15. Intimate, detailed portrayals of the lives of teenage girls rarely crop up on screen (the pair say their only real inspiration was Welcome to the Dollhouse, Todd Solondz’s uncomfortable 1995 coming-of-age comedy about a lovelorn seventh-grader). They were keen to rectify that. “I’d never seen middle school as it was,” says Erskine. “[In real life] it was R-rated, it was weird, it was ugly.” The ugliness on show is not always connected to puberty. When the pair team up with more popular girls to play a geriatric version of the Spice Girls for a school project (there is a semi-logical reason behind this), Maya, who is half-Japanese, is told she must be Scary, and then a servant, because she’s “tan”. Things escalate: by the episode’s end, her crush has shouted racial abuse at her in the school corridor. It is a particularly upsetting episode, but the pair were keen that the theme wasn’t restricted to a single storyline. “We never wanted to have it solved,” says Erskine. “We don’t do an episode on Maya’s identity in the second season but it’s there. She’ll have microaggressions happen, like when [their friend] Maura says: ‘Your mum has a really thick accent.’ I love having those little moments in the show, because that’s what life is. You don’t solve it. I barely understand it now. I’m still figuring it out.” When the pandemic hit, the pair had not finished filming season two’s final block of episodes; only the first seven will make it to our screens this year. Remaining scenes were mainly big ensemble pieces, including a bar mitzvah. As filming for TV starts to resume, the pair say people keep asking them if there are ways to rewrite the action: “‘What if you don’t have a big party and it’s only a couple of people and you’re outside of it the whole time?’” But they aren’t keen. “We can’t compromise to suit Covid,” says Erskine. Their reluctance to water down their material is understandable. Harrowing and hilarious, Pen15 derives its power from its unflinching portrayal of adolescence. It’s a special kind of hell: one that even a global pandemic can’t quite upstage. Pen15 season two is available on NowTV, and airs Mondays, 9pm, Sky Comedy