Substitute Arnaut Danjuma’s late winner earned Bournemouth a 1-0 home win over Bristol City, lifting Jason Tindall’s unbeaten side to second in the Championship. Danjuma bagged his third goal of the season nine minutes from time and only six minutes after his introduction. The Dutch winger skipped past City defender Zak Vyner before calmly lifting his shot over the advancing Daniel Bentley. Bournemouth had grown into the game in the second half after Bristol City had the better of the first. The Robins had a chance after just four minutes, Antoine Semenyo firing wide after Cherries defender Chris Mepham gave the ball away. Asmir Begovic was called into action midway through the first half, getting fingertips to Tyreeq Bakinson’s angled strike. The visitors thought they had taken the lead on the half-hour through Tomas Kalas’ looping header from a corner, only for Joshua King to nod the ball off the line. Bournemouth’s best chance of the first half came from Solanke’s deflected shot, turned smartly away by Bentley. Solanke struck the outside of the post from Lloyd Kelly’s cross on 54 minutes, before Junior Stanislas drilled his shot narrowly wide. It looked as if Bristol City had done enough to earn a draw before super sub Danjuma popped up with the winner. Sheffield Wednesday are nine points from safety after losing 3-0 at Rotherham, in a game briefly suspended by an unauthorised drone flying over the stadium. The referee, Jarred Gillett, was informed of the drone and took the players off the pitch after four minutes. Wednesday might have wished they had stayed in the dressing room as they found themselves three goals and a man down by half-time. Rotherham took the lead straight after the resumption, Jamie Lindsay heading home Freddie Ladapo’s deflected shot. Ladapo was then hauled down when through on goal by Tom Lees, who was shown a straight red card. Dan Barlaser smashed the resulting penalty beyond Cameron Dawson to double Rotherham’s lead, and Lindsay added another on the rebound soon after to compound Wednesday’s misery. Millwall moved up to third with a deserved 2-0 win at Preston despite travelling to Deepdale without any of their senior coaching staff. Under-23s manager Kevin Nugent and player-coach Shaun Williams took charge after manager Gary Rowett and two other coaches had tested positive for Covid-19. On-loan striker Kenneth Zohore put Millwall ahead early in the second half from Jed Wallace’s pass, before Wallace converted a penalty late on. Preston’s dismal home form continues – Alex Neil’s side are without a point or goal from four home league games this season. Chris Hughton remains unbeaten as Nottingham Forest manager after his side came from a goal and man down to draw at Luton. Glen Rea fired the Hatters ahead before Nicholas Ioannou was sent off just before half-time for a foul on Martin Cranie. Forest earned a point when Ryan Yates’ header deflected in off Rea midway through the second half. Birmingham climbed above Huddersfield in mid-table thanks to substitute Lukas Jutkiewicz’s last-minute winner. The Blues ended their 322-minute goal drought through Gary Gardner in the first half, only for Isaac Mbenza to level in the 85th minute with a free kick. Jutkiewicz snatched victory for the hosts after Jonathan Leko’s shot hit the bar. Martyn Waghorn gave Derby a first-half lead against Cardiff with a brilliant free kick, but Kieffer Moore earned a point for the visitors 13 minutes from time. Moore and Junior Hoilett also hit the woodwork for Cardiff and Waghorn was denied a second late on, but Philip Cocu’s side at least halted a run of five home league defeats.