The recent tendency for the European Tour’s marquee event to fall the way of English golfers has continued, after Tyrrell Hatton confidently pressed home a 54-hole advantage to win the PGA Championship at Wentworth. Hatton’s success means home golfers have prevailed seven times in the last dozen stagings of this championship. Having held a three-shot lead overnight, Hatton’s 67 saw him triumph by four. Victor Perez emerged as Hatton’s biggest threat but a wayward drive at the par-five 17th, which the Frenchman really needed to birdie, allowed the 28-year-old from Buckinghamshire a relatively stress-free finish. Hatton’s worst round of the week was 69, ensuring a 19-under-par aggregate. Hatton flirted with water on the closing hole but even that was barely relevant. Perez admirably held on to second. “It has been a goal to win this tournament in my career,” said Hatton, who used to attend Wentworth as a spectator when a child. “Part of me is sad that I didn’t get to experience it with crowds but it is amazing to win this trophy. I’m looking forward to the Masters, which is not too far round the corner but first of all I’m looking forward to celebrating this.” Hatton, once better known for on-course tantrums than a successful pursuit of titles – he still managed a club toss during round four – has matured into a fine player. This time, his short game over four days was outstanding. Hatton has now achieved 2020 victories on both sides of the Atlantic. That only one of the world’s top 10 appeared at Wentworth is not Hatton’s problem as he once again demonstrated composure when closing out a win. That individual from the leading group in the rankings, Patrick Reed, made an eagle at the 72nd hole to close at 14 under and tied third. Hatton should himself leap inside that top 10, from 15th, for the first time when new rankings are published on Monday. Andy Sullivan – remember him? – signed for a Sunday 65 to share third with Reed. He later expanded on this return to form. “It took a pandemic to show me how much of an idiot I’ve been on the golf course,” said Sullivan. “There’s a lot worse things happening than being on a golf course and moaning about it. I am rededicating myself to the game and giving it my best efforts.” Ian Poulter claimed fifth at minus 13. Matt Fitzpatrick tied seventh with Tommy Fleetwood’s 73 sliding him back to a share of 13th.