It’s always a risky thing to say, so let me preface it with the assurance that I mean it not as faint praise, but as encouragement born out of a wish to enhance your lives in some small but significant way. OK? Right – ’tis this. Stick with Out of Her Mind (BBC Two), even if you find your own divided over the issue. The new six-part series by the standup comedian Sara Pascoe is a grower. Its slightly shaky start evolves into something delicately intricate, clever and – by the end – moving. Pascoe plays Sara Pascoe (not even, really, “Sara Pascoe”, we are given to understand), a slightly awkward, nicety-free zone who is negotiating long-term singledom, her family, and the encroaching sense that life is something that happens to other people. A large part of her arrested development seems to stem from being dumped by her fiance 10 weeks after they got engaged, 15 years ago. Her sister Lucy (Fiona Button) is about to have a boob job and get married, both prospects which distress and frustrate Sara. Her best friend, Scoopy (Cariad Lloyd), is heavily pregnant with her first child and about to enter a world into which Sara cannot pass, and her mother Carol (Juliet Stevenson) is now making up for her years of lost time as a single mother after their dad left her with two young daughters. She spends most of her time in Zumba or on her home exercise bike, keeping it tight for a succession of more or less unsuitable partners. It is the form rather than the content where Pascoe makes her mark. The “real” story is periodically interrupted by the comic breaking the fourth wall to comment on what has just happened, why she wrote it, and what she is really trying to do. Drawing on the research she did for her two books (Animal, and Sex, Power and Money, which look at the sociocultural accretions around simple facts, evolutionary science and biology, and the experience of being a woman in a mad, mad, mad, mad world), she deconstructs and reconstructs as she goes, undercutting well-worn tropes and forcing us to re-examine what we have just watched and how we have just reacted. It’s the type of manoeuvre that generally does nothing but hold up the show while a creator has a moment of look-at-me cleverness, but Pascoe only ever presses it into her show’s service, pushing things forward, always posing more questions, adding texture and emotional heft to the whole. As the series goes on, the two worlds become increasingly porous and the sequences more ambitious (there’s a kind of flashback at one point done in stop-motion with felted dolls) without the show losing integrity, structurally, narratively or psychologically. It is masterfully done. There are weaknesses. I am not sure, for example, that having a black character (Luna, played by Cash Holland) comment on the peripheral nature of her role makes up for her still being a peripheral character – it feels like the conversation about privilege and genuine representation has slightly outpaced that particular decision. And in an ideal world, of course, the first episode would have been stronger – less broad brush, a bit more confident in itself and the audience – to maximise its chances of hooking as many people as it deserves. The writing is quintessential Pascoe. Unadorned, direct, seemingly simple and effortless, and actually polished, honed and perfectly weighted along every hardworking inch. As an actor she suffers slightly from the problem that bedevils many a standup – an unwillingness to fully commit to moments that particularly need it, or to appear genuinely vulnerable – but this matters less than it would in a format whose artifice is less markedly on display. It is another fine addition to a rising tide of talent that was until now rarely allowed to cause much more than a ripple. Shows conceived and created by women and forged in their experience, without (the results suggest) too much outside interference or forced compromise are now a force to be reckoned with. From Sally Wainwright’s Happy Valley (a third season of which is now being written), Sharon Horgan’s work (Pulling, Catastrophe, Motherland), Phoebe Waller-Bridge’s Fleabag (of course), Daisy Haggard’s Back to Life and Aisling Bea’s This Way Up to Michaela Coel’s retooling of the whole idea of television with I May Destroy You, and, most recently, Lucy Prebble (and Billie Piper’s) I Hate Suzie, it feels that a quiet but genuine revolution is under way. Long may it continue.