Ah, the internet. What a place. A great accompaniment to any meal and a great substitute for thinking while on the toilet. I love and loathe the internet in equal measures. It’s not good for my mental health most of the time, but sometimes I come across things that make me laugh so much that I DON’T go off the grid and live with a family of emus. These are my top 10. These are the pictures and videos that I have never not laughed at. It is no exaggeration when I say that the first time I saw this I was on a train returning from Glasgow to Edinburgh (roughly 1 hour and 20 minutes) and I laughed the entire train trip. I had tears streaming down my face. I was with two friends, neither of whom found it as funny as I did. I was completely out of control. In fact, finding it again for this article reduced me to tears once more. Just look at it again. This is the best thing that has happened all Covid. my boss turned herself into a potato on our Microsoft teams meeting and can’t figure out how to turn the setting off, so she was just stuck like this the entire meeting pic.twitter.com/uHLgJUOsXk Sometimes we can’t explain why something tickles our funny bone. This is that for me. But I used to watch this once a day. I used to dream about this damn shrimp. Every little part of this makes me laugh. Short and sweet. Digestible. Relatable. “Fenton!” I found this after I visited the park it was from. My friend showed me and told me that this was huge in the UK and even made it onto the news. Fenton is a dog that is chasing a huge pack of deer onto a highway. It literally stops traffic. There are fewer funny things than dogs accidentally wreaking havoc. A classic mix-up. This is one of the purest memes. I love imagining what his thoughts were when he read it. This may be a bit niche because I’m a huge parrot fan but I love how the owner reasons with the bird. This is only a seven-second clip but I think I’ve probably watched it literally hundreds of times. I love watching people getting scared. If you have a couple of hours to spare, I really suggest falling down the rabbit hole that is live news bloopers. I could – and occasionally do – watch these bloopers for hours on end. I just love watching people trying to fix stuff going wrong. Again, when I imagine the response to this I can’t stop laughing. I love a wholesome mistake. Follow Steph Tisdell on Instagram and Facebook