This is the story of how I got it wrong. I remember the first time the prospect of a Women’s Big Bash League was mentioned to me. I was sceptical. It sounded to me like a box-ticking exercise piggy-backing off the early success of the boys’ tournament. We had been hanging out for a T20 tournament of our own, but instead it felt like we were being shrunk down and shoe-horned into the BBL. I could already hear people saying, “Uhhh, they’ve got a token women’s curtain-raiser on before the men’s match.” Winning a WBBL title felt like a distant second to a WNCL title back then. The Adelaide Strikers had a strong squad in that first season, but we played like crap. We didn’t do a great job of identifying our roles within the team and finished second-last. The scheduling took some getting used to, too. We played quite a lot of double-headers where we’d finish a game, have a 40-minute break, then start warming-up for the next one. It’s amazing to think that here we are, just five short years later, about to start the latest edition of what is undoubtedly the world’s best women’s cricket league. What the WBBL has done in that time has been nothing short of incredible. Never in my life have I been happier to be so wrong about something. I don’t see the WBBL as just a domestic cricket tournament anymore. It’s the future of our game. It’s where we attract kids, nurture them, offer them opportunities to play either for fun or for competition and grow women’s cricket for generations to come. It brings joy to think about the girls of today who can watch the Australian team and their local WBBL franchise on TV. I didn’t know there was an Australian women’s cricket team until I made my first South Australian squad as a 16-year-old. There was no avenue to watch them, hear them or read about them in the media. It was a similar story when I first started representing Australia. The only people who really cared about us were those who had invested in us personally at some level or the few real, hard-core fans. Notions of filling the MCG or playing to millions on TV? That’s something the boys did, not us. Today, people don’t just care about the product, they care about the personalities. It’s a powerful platform. I can happily say that I derive as much happiness from interacting with fans, many of them on the issue of same sex marriage, as I do from winning matches and tournaments with my teammates, whom I love deeply. There have been a few magical moments when people in the crowd at Australian and WBBL games have thanked me for my advocacy and explained how it’s helped them personally. It’s the same on Instagram. “You spoke to my friend at the game who is struggling with his sexuality and it had a big impact…” A little over a year ago, a teenage girl tracked down my personal email address to say she was worried about coming out to her parents and didn’t know how to do it. I shared with her some of my experiences. She wrote back a little while later to say that she’d had the conversation, it had gone much better than she was expecting, and she was happy. I realised I have a platform and people are actually listening to me. None of this could have happened without the investment in and support of women’s cricket. The rapid evolution of tournaments like the WBBL are changing the country in a really positive way. And then there’s the quality of the actual cricket. The fact that more than 20 of the best players and coaches from around the world have opted to fly to Australia in the middle of a pandemic and hotel quarantine for two weeks gives you an indication of the esteem in which the WBBL is held globally. The local players feel the same. The quality of cricket gets better every year. TV networks wouldn’t agree to broadcast 57% more WBBL games year-on-year if they didn’t think it would pull big audiences. Personally, I can’t wait to join the hub in Sydney this week. It’s a brand new experience and the whole unknown element of this season excites me. How will all the teams get along in the one place? How will new players gel with new teams. How will two baristas cope with 250 of us? So much time, effort and investment has gone into making this tournament happen. I am eternally grateful to everyone who has played a role in getting us here.