It was hardly a first touch that was going to inspire confidence. Barely 70 seconds had passed at the Amsterdam Arena when Joe Gomez took possession on the left-hand side of his penalty area. Attempting to shepherd the ball back to his goalkeeper, Gomez suddenly felt the breath of an Ajax forward at his shoulder and appeared to panic slightly, with Adrián required to sprint forward and smash the ball out for a throw-in, colliding with his 23-year-old teammate in the process. In the absence of the defensive colossus Virgil van Dijk it has fallen to the softly spoken south Londoner to step into the huge void created by the Dutchman’s untimely injury. But after his shaky start, Gomez will be relieved that it was another defensive mishap in the form of Nicolás Tagliafico’s comical own goal that stole the headlines against Ajax. Before this match, Klopp had defended his decision not to sign a central defender in the transfer window after allowing Dejan Lovren to join Zenit St Petersburg in the summer. Interest in Schalke’s Turkey international Ozan Kabak never went further than initial enquiries, while it remains to be seen whether a mooted summer move for RB Leipzig’s Dayot Upamecano will be brought forward given Van Dijk’s injury. But as well as Fabinho’s superb versatility, Liverpool’s inaction in the transfer market was also an indication of the high esteem in which the former Forest Hill high school pupil is held by his manager. In 2017, Klopp predicted he could be at the club “for the next 15 years” if all goes to plan, although on the evidence of his performance against Ajax, Gomez remains very much a work in progress. Signed from Charlton by Brendan Rodgers in the summer of 2015, Klopp had been at Anfield for just five days when Gomez sustained an anterior cruciate ligament injury while playing for England’s under‑21 side. Having provided an assist on his Liverpool debut playing at left‑back, the defender who learned his trade in caged pitches in Catford spent a year on the sidelines but returned leaner, having been urged by his manager to shed his “beach body” during his recovery. After establishing himself at right‑back, another injury setback meant Gomez missed the end of the 2017-18 season but repaid Klopp’s faith in him as a central defender at the start of the next campaign when both Joël Matip and Lovren were injured. With Van Dijk a steadying influence alongside him, Liverpool conceded just one goal in their opening four matches and it seemed likely Gomez could develop into the Dutchman’s long-term partner ahead of Matip. Yet despite starting 22 Premier League matches last season as Liverpool ended their long wait for the league title, Gomez has never quite nailed down his place in the team for either club or country. Having made a memorable England debut in 2017 when he was named man of the match for successfully nullifying Neymar, Gomez has been used only sparingly by Gareth Southgate, despite at one stage appearing to be his favoured option to play alongside Harry Maguire in a four-man defence that now appears to have been jettisoned. Three years on from that game against Brazil, he has just 11 caps. While Gomez’s athleticism is now perhaps his strongest asset, his defensive awareness still has plenty of room for improvement and he would have been grateful to see Adrián come to his rescue after inadvertently playing David Neres onside just before Liverpool took the lead. Fabinho’s brilliant goalline clearance just before half‑time to deny Dusan Tadic’s lob was straight from the Van Dijk school of defending and the Brazilian seems to thrive on the extra responsibility on his shoulders. His absence from the midfield will be sorely missed, however, with James Milner struggling to exert the same kind of control given his advancing years. Like Manchester City with Fernandinho, Liverpool are a better team when Fabinho is in the engine room. Jordan Henderson’s introduction at half-time was an acknowledgement that Liverpool were lacking in leadership against a sprightly Ajax side who still retain some of their sparkle from the run to the Champions League semi‑finals two seasons ago despite the loss of so many key players. Adrián watched on helplessly as Davy Klaasen’s brilliant drive cannoned back off the post after he was set up expertly by Tadic in another close shave. Klopp’s decision to substitute his entire front three on the hour was eye-catching but apparently preordained, although it brought the depth of his squad into even sharper focus as Ajax pressed for an equaliser their approach probably justified. Even if he remains short of match fitness, Henderson’s energetic presence ensured Gomez enjoyed an easier ride in the second half as Liverpool attempted to close out victory by scoring a second goal that never came. There was still the odd heart-stopping moment that only a makeshift defence can provide. But that is something that Liverpool supporters will just have to get used to.