European Union sanctions against Belarus are expected to enter into force later on Friday, after the bloc’s leaders resolved a dispute with Cyprus that caused an embarrassing delay to EU action. In a standoff that tarnished the EU’s credibility, Cyprus had insisted that its EU partners take a tough stance against Turkey for its energy exploration in disputed eastern Mediterranean waters off its coast, before it would agree to the Belarus sanctions. After several hours of talks into the night, the leaders agreed on a statement of support for Cyprus and Greece, and issued a stern warning to Turkey that it could face punitive measures if it continues the undersea drilling work. The text, where the EU “strongly condemn[ed] violations of the sovereign rights of the Republic of Cyprus”, unlocked the Cypriot veto on Belarus. The European commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, said she was “very happy” there was finally a way forward for sanctions on Belarus: “There will be no impunity for those who are responsible for the crackdown on demonstrators and opposition politicians,” she told reporters. Germany’s Chancellor Angela Merkel, who is due to meet the Belarusian opposition leader Svetlana Tikhanovskaya next Tuesday, described the sanctions as a very important signal. “The European Union is now taking action against those who are opposing democratic movements.” The final list of Belarusian officials subject to EU travel bans and asset freezes runs to about 40 names, but does not include Alexander Lukashenko. Officials have said the authoritarian leader could be added to the list in the coming weeks, if he refuses to enter talks with the opposition. “We will follow the developments,” said the European council president, Charles Michel. The UK and Canada, who separately launched sanctions against Belarus earlier this week, included Lukashenko on their smaller lists of sanctioned officials. Olga Oliker, director for Europe and Central Asia at the International Crisis Group, said the Belarus sanctions revealed EU states’ “frustration with a fraudulent election and continued violent crackdowns on protesters and opposition figures” but were unlikely to change Lukashenko’s calculus and policies. Many EU member states were angered by what they saw as political “hostage-taking” by Cyprus. But the Cypriot president, Nicos Anastasiades – making his stand on the 60th anniversary of Cypriot independence – argued that the EU needed a firmer response on Turkey. In a televised address to the nation, he expressed his “sincere gratitude” to EU member states for their “staunch support and solidarity” but called for “a more tangible and effective stance to bring about an end to gunboat diplomacy”. Ahead of the breakthrough, Lithuania’s president, Gitanas Nausėda, said it was “just inappropriate” that the EU had failed to agree sanctions one and a half months after its 27 leaders had promised restrictive measures against officials responsible for vote-rigging and the repression of peaceful protests. “The situation in Belarus is deteriorating. We have continuing violations of human rights, we have detained people, tortured people,” Nausėda said, adding that Lukashenko was not ready to enter talks with civil society. “In this situation, I think the European Union should do much more.” Throughout Thursday evening, the leaders debated what approach to take in the EU’s increasingly tense ties with Turkey over its drilling in the Mediterranean Sea, its roles in the conflicts in Libya and Syria, and as a source of migrants trying to reach Europe. In a summit statement, they agreed that if Turkey continued to react positively in talks with Cyprus and Greece the bloc will “launch a positive political EU–Turkey agenda” with trade and customs incentives, and they held out the prospect of more money and benefits for continued cooperation on migrant flows. If not, the leaders warned, “the EU will use all the instruments and the options at its disposal,” to “defend its interests and those of its member states”. Von der Leyen said: “It is now Turkey that has to prove that it wants to go the constructive road with us, and this is the offer tonight. But we are very clear that in the opposite case we have all necessary tools at our disposal.” During a speech in parliament, Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, said the EU had turned into an “ineffective, horizonless and shallow” structure and become a “slave to the conceit” of Greece and Cyprus. However, he also said that Turkey was committed to resolving disputes through dialogue. With Associated Press