Wayne Rooney rolled back the years with a brilliant free-kick as Derby struck late to earn a 1-0 win at Norwich to record their first points of the season. The 33-year-old captain curled home from just outside the box in the 87th minute to secure his side a priceless victory. It was rough justice on Norwich, who dominated for long periods and wasted a gilt-edged chance to go ahead early in the second half when Teemu Pukki missed from the penalty spot after slipping on the sodden turf. Bristol City returned to the top of the table after maintaining their 100% record with a battling 2-1 win at struggling Nottingham Forest. City took a 2-0 lead inside 22 minutes as Chris Martin set up goals for Andreas Weimann and Nahki Wells. Forest halved the deficit as Luke Freeman rifled home the hosts’ first goal of the campaign from 30 yards on 35 but, despite pushing hard for an equaliser in an improved display, Forest slumped to their fourth straight defeat. The League One clash between Oxford United and Crewe Alexandra was postponed after one of the Railwaymen's players was informed they had  tested positive for Covid-19 on Saturday morning. It was announced less than an hour before kick-off that the match at the Kassam Stadium would not take place. An EFL statement read: "Each case is judged on its individual merits, and due to the circumstances, the Club has advised the EFL it is unable to fulfil the fixture as players and first team staff are now required to self-isolate in line with EFL and Government guidance. "A revised date for the rearranged fixture will be confirmed in due course." Reading and Watford were both unbeaten going into the weekend but the Hornets lost that record as George Puscas netted to continue the home side’s perfect start. The striker’s scruffy goal four minutes before the break secured a 1-0 win and put Reading level on 12 points with Bristol City. Watford dominated the second half but couldn’t find a way past the resolute Royals defence. Bournemouth had started the day at the top of the table after a 3-1 win at Coventry in Friday’s game. Dan Gosling’s second-half double proved decisive after Jefferson Lerman’s opener for the Cherries had been wiped out by Matthew Godden’s penalty. Three teams started the day with maximum points but that became two after previous leaders Ipswich were pegged back in a 1-1 draw at MK Dons. That allowed Lincoln to jump to the summit after they came from 2-1 down with five minutes left to beat Blackpool 3-2. Hull also have the maximum 12 points after edging out Plymouth 1-0. Sunderland are the other unbeaten side after holding on for a 0-0 draw at Charlton after Tom Flanagan was sent off with 17 minutes remaining. Portsmouth were the day's high scorers as Marcus Harness hit a hat-trick in a 4-2 win at Burton while Crewe's game with Oxford was postponed 30 minutes before kick-off after one of the home players tested positive for Covid-19. All the action took place after the break at Swansea where the hosts edged out Millwall 2-1. Jake Bidwell’s strike straight after half-time was wiped out by Millwall’s Tom Bradshaw five minutes later but Ben Cabango lashed home on 68 to keep the Swans in fourth. Middlesbrough marked Neil Warnock’s 1500th game in management with a 2-1 home win over Barnsley. Jonny Howson bagged the opener in first-half stoppage time before the new signing Chuba Akpom made it two in two since his recent move from Paok. There were late nerves when Cauley Woodrow slotted in an 89th-minute penalty but Barnsley still have just one point in four games. Luton made it two home wins out of two with a 2-0 success over second-bottom Wycombe. Pelly Ruddock’s goal just shy of the hour looked set to be the winner until Wycombe found the net late on. However, that was ruled out for offside and Luton went up the other end to secure the points via Elliott Lee. Blackburn missed the chance to nudge up to fifth after being held to a 0-0 draw by 10-man Cardiff. The visitors had Lee Tomlin sent off with 21 minutes remaining but Rovers couldn’t cash in. Newport lead the table in League Two after coming from 1-0 down with 12 minutes left to grab a 2-1 home win over Mansfield. Their 10-point haul is one clear of Morecambe, who also scored late to edge out Port Vale, who had started the day in second spot. Cambridge dropped from first to fourth after going down 2-0 at Exeter. Salford jumped from seventh to third after a 1-0 win at Stevenage while the home side's near neighbours Oldham were involved in the most entertaining game of the day, a 3-3 draw at Colchester. Elsewhere, Carlisle beat Barrow in a rare Cumbrian derby and Bolton secured their first points with a 2-1 win at Harrogate. The other Saturday winners were Cheltenham thanks to a 2-0 win at Leyton Orient.  Sheffield Wednesday, who were docked 12 points before the season started, remain bottom of course. But there was more frustration today as Macauley Bonne scored in the sixth minute of added time to give visitors QPR a 1-1 draw. The Owls had taken the lead through Yoann Barbet’s own goal on 54. In the Yorkshire derby between Rotherham and Huddersfield there was also late twist. Ben Wiles grabbed what looked like the winner with a well-struck shot from just outside the area on 33 but the visitors snatched a point in the sixth-minute of injury time through Angus MacDonald’s own goal.