A former Scottish police officer turned MI5 spy has inflicted major damage on the New IRA leading to the arrests of alleged key figures and the disruption of links between violent dissident republicans and terrorist groups in the Middle East. Dennis McFadden infiltrated the New IRA’s high command over the last eight years, providing safe houses in Northern Ireland and Scotland that were in fact bugged by the Security Service while handing out free tickets for Celtic matches and drinks from the bar in his home. He played a central role in MI5’s Operation Arbacia, which culminated at the end of this summer with the arrest of nine suspected leading New IRA members, all of whom have been charged with directing acts of terrorism. McFadden will be the crown’s key witness in what will be the biggest terrorist trial since the so-called supergrass cases of the early to mid-1980s. The nine suspected New IRA figures charged with directing terrorism are Kevin Barry Murphy,50, Davy Jordan, 49, Damien McLaughlin, 44, Gary Hayden, 48, Joe Barr, 44, Shea Reynolds , 26, Paddy McDaid, 50, Sharon Jordan, 45, and Mandy Duffy, 49. Lawyers for the defendants have raised issues about entrapment and the reported role of a state agent. A 10th suspect, Issam Bassalat, 62, a Palestinian doctor based in Scotland, has also been arrested and stands accused of preparation of terrorist acts. He was arrested at Heathrow airport in August. Bassalat claims he only made contact with republicans in Northern Ireland because he thought he was going over to speak at a Palestinian solidarity meeting in County Tyrone. Bassalat was denied bail at Dungannon magistrates court in Tyrone. His defence lawyer said he was an innocent man caught in “the dirty squabble of war between MI5 and Irish republicans”. All 10 suspects are being held in the high-security Maghaberry prison outside Belfast. One security source in Belfast told the Guardian that McFadden had been an MI5 agent for more than two decades, initially infiltrating Sinn Féin and then, on orders from his handlers, making contact with violent republican dissidents shortly after the New IRA was founded in 2012. “As well as the arrests and the eventual presence of McFadden in the witness box to give evidence, his main achievement has been to sow paranoia and distrust within what is left of the New IRA,” the senior security source said. “The dissidents in Derry no longer trust the ones in Belfast and Tyrone who brought McFadden into their organisation. There are accusations of other informers in their ranks now. In terms of terrorist operations thwarted, captured weapons and good hard intelligence on this organisation, McFadden has dealt their morale a massive blow.” McFadden, from Glasgow, eventually managed to join the New IRA’s political allies, Saoradh, and sit on its national executive. Until MI5 took him into protective custody to England at the end of the summer, McFadden had been living in a house in Glengormley on the northern outskirts of Belfast. One man unconnected to the New IRA or Saoradh who knew McFadden and often drove him around Northern Ireland, said the Glaswegian came across as a hardline true believer in the dissident republican cause. McFadden even expressed his disdain for one of the most prominent IRA informers to be unmasked as a British agent, the former Sinn Féin chief administrator at Stormont Denis Donaldson. In April 2006, Donaldson was found dead with shotgun wounds at a cottage where had been living for several months after being exposed as a longstanding British informer inside the mainstream republican movement. McFadden’s former acquaintance said: “About a year ago I was in County Donegal and out of curiosity I drove up to the spot where Denis Donaldson was killed. I took some pictures of the cottage on my iPhone of its interior. A few months later I was in the car with Dennis McFadden and I showed him the pics of Donaldson’s cottage. McFadden just shook his head and then said: ‘Well he should have known what he was getting himself into when he became a tout [informer]. He deserved what he got. He was a traitor.’ This guy McFadden must have had some brass neck to say a thing like that knowing that he too was an informer.” MI5 got McFadden out of Northern Ireland shortly before the arrests of the nine suspected New IRA figures in August. The defendants are due to face a non-jury trial in 2021.