New defence, same result. A smart finish from Pedro Neto secured a narrow victory for Wolves as Scott Parker’s side suffered a fourth successive defeat since returning to the Premier League. But while the Fulham manager will be desperate to add reinforcements on transfer deadline day, with a £16m move for Barcelona’s Jean-Clair Todibo looking set to be completed, there was some encouragement that his side can bridge the gap this time round. Having made three changes to his back four after stinging criticism on social media from Tony Khan, Fulham’s director of football operations, following the defeat to Aston Villa last week, at least this time Parker’s side stayed in the contest until the final whistle thanks largely to a strong performance from the goalkeeper Alphonse Areola. Had Aboubakar Kamara made the most of his gilt-edged chance 10 minutes from time, however, it could have been much better for the visitors. “On another day we could have had a draw because he has to score really,” Parker said. “It’s fine margins at this level and we’re on the other side of them at the moment. But this is a team that is learning and developing.” These two teams shipped 17 goals in their opening three matches and recorded only one victory. Yet while Fulham’s defensive problems have been well-documented, Wolves have also showed signs of brittleness at the back. The former Fulham academy player Max Kilman – who gave up his status as an England futsal player when he joined Wolves from non-league Maidenhead United in 2018 – was drafted into the three-man defence for only his third Premier League start, with Romain Saïss filling in at left-wing back. Perhaps anticipating the danger of Adama Traore on the opposite flank, Parker selected Antonee Robinson and Joe Bryan to double up, only for his counterpart Nuno Espírito Santoto select Daniel Podence instead. After a solid start that saw Bryan sting the gloves of Rui Patrício as Fulham tried to venture forward, a familiar defensive lapse in the 29th minute almost undid all their good work. Ivan Cavaleiro’s attempted flick deep inside his own half against his former club was ill-advised and it took an excellent double save from Areola to deny Neto and then Nelson Semedo from the rebound. Apart from that, however, an improvised volley from Raul Jiménez, who ended speculation about his future by signing a new contract until 2024 on Saturday, was the closest Wolves came to breaking the deadlock in a first-half performance that was seriously lacking in intensity. A Rúben Neves effort from outside the area that fizzed just wide of a post was at least a signal of intent from Wolves at the start of the second half. Jiménez should have made more of his opportunity after a speculative long ball forward but once again found Areola in his path. But the French World Cup winner who is on a season-long loan from Paris Saint-Germain, could do nothing to stop Neto’s low drive from a tight angle after Fulham failed to clear their lines. “We have improved but we need some more time to get sharper,” said a relieved Espírito Santo. Parker introduced the RB Leipzig loanee Ademola Lookman from the bench with a quarter of the game to play but it was a fellow substitute – Kamara – who spurned their best chance of equalising. In acres of space following a quick break upfield from Lookman’s through ball, Aleksandar Mitrovic surprisingly chose to pass to his teammate instead of shooting and could only watch as Kamara’s shot went straight at Patrício. But Fulham will be thankful that Lookman was not punished in injury time when he appeared to kick out at Neves after being fouled.