“Do I think the obsession with medals has gone too far? Absolutely,” says Paula Dunn, with a clarity that is striking and unusual from someone who operates in the higher stratospheres of British sport. “We’ve got to look beyond the medal table, because medals are just not enough.” Dunn pauses. Takes stock. Reflects on the pressures in the UK Sport system and where, as we have seen in cycling and gymnastics, it can lead. “Don’t get me wrong, when we did really well in Rio it was lovely,” she admits. “But there is more to it than that. You’ve got a responsibility as well. You don’t want people coming out of a sport saying that they weren’t happy.” These days the word trailblazer has become stale with overuse, but Dunn is certainly that and a whole lot more. She was the first woman to become a head coach at British Athletics when she took over the Paralympic programme after London 2012. The first black head coach, too. And an undisputed success story to boot: with Dunn at the helm Britain won 33 medals at the Rio Paralympics, four more than at the home Games in 2012. But that, she admits with a laugh, doesn’t stop her waking up in a cold sweat thinking about UK Sport targets or filling out one of their spreadsheets predicting where her athletes might finish in Tokyo. “Any head coach that says otherwise is not telling the truth,” she says with a smile. “Of course you worry. Yes, you have to justify the public money that is invested in your sport – I am not naive – but some aspects of the job can be emotionally draining, especially when you have to make decisions involving athletes.” Last week UK Sport said it intended to focus future funding of Olympic and Paralympic sport on medal potential over a 12-year period instead of four, and focus more on supporting “the development of the person as well as the performer”. It is a change in emphasis Dunn clearly believes is overdue. “I always bear in mind that behind every number there’s a person. You can never lose sight of that. No athlete goes to the biggest event in their life to fail. So if negative things happen, you have to accept that: it is just one of those things. My job always is to protect and help athletes.” It's the ability to listen more and talk less. That way you hear what your athletes are saying – really hear them When we speak on a crisp autumn day in Manchester, Dunn wants to hammer home another point: it is possible to succeed at the highest levels of sport being kind. In fact, she says, it is an advantage. “You can never be too nice. People think nice is weak. It isn’t. Because everybody says I’m really nice, and I am, but I’m not weak. People get that mixed up.” Arguments between athletes, she insists, can be smoothed over with a mixture of data and diplomacy – especially if they know that a coach is fair and has good intentions. “It’s the ability to listen more and talk less,” she says. “That way you hear what your athletes are saying – really hear them – and what they’re not saying. That gives you a real indication where they are mentally and emotionally; where they are in their time of life.” Dunn also recognises the parallels between her and Christian Malcolm, UK Athletics’ new Olympic head coach, given both were inexperienced when they took over their current roles. So can Malcolm make the same leap she has over the past eight years? “I really do think so,” she says. “I’ve had a number of calls with Christian. The substance will remain private but he is very excited. When I came into the role people questioned me too. He is doing the right thing by speaking to a lot of people, but I keep telling him that the only way he can lead is to be himself. You have to be authentic. “He’s got loads of really good qualities – he’s highly likeable, he is really knowledgeable, he has been in the GB system on the relay side, and he took the plunge and went to Australia as performance director. So I think he’s got more skills than people give him credit for.” But what about the fact he has been a coach for barely six years? “Yes, but he’s going to learn on the job,” Dunn insists. “And I just think everybody – whether it’s coaches, athletes or the media – just need to give him time to develop. I think he could be great.” When Malcolm became head coach, several athletes, including Dina Asher-Smith, hailed it as a new era for the sport. Dunn agrees but adds a caveat. “It is, but at the same time no sport can sit on its laurels,” she says. “It can’t be: ‘We’ve got a black head coach for the Olympics and a black head coach for the Paras, when we tick that box we move on.’ This is something that we need to keep working at. We’ve definitely got more BAME [black, Asian and minority ethnic] coaches out there who have got really good and innovative ideas.” For now, most of Dunn’s time is taken up with planning for next year’s Tokyo Paralympics. While she expects her young team to do well, she also wants to dampen expectations. “Talent takes time to develop. And what makes it tougher is that the landscape of Paralympic sport has moved so quickly in the past two cycles. “But I can promise you this: we will go there and give it 100%. If that gets us our medal target, brilliant. And if it doesn’t, but we come away with some great performances and personal bests, I will be proud of every last one of them.” For more information on how UK Coaching can support your local coach and to access coaching tools and resources visit www.ukcoaching.org