There has been a slight end of empire feel about Manchester City and Pep Guardiola this season but appearances can deceive. Without ever being quite at their best, City comfortably did enough to ensure they headed back across the Pennines having silenced those who interpreted the sight of Guardiola sitting alone in the dug-out well before kick off, staring moodily at the empty stands, as confirmation of a manager in crisis. Instead that mantle passes to Chris Wilder. His side have one only point from seven games and, after taking the top tier by storm last term, appear to have developed full blown second season syndrome. The electronic signs warning visitors entering the Sheffield to maintain “very high alert” relate to coronavirus levels but they could apply equally to the danger confronting the Blades. As his side re-entered familiar top half of the table territory, Guardiola decided it was time to quell the fears of City fans suspecting he was on the brink of defection. “My period as a manager in Barcelona is over,” he stressed, dismissing speculation linking him with a return to his old club. “I’m here, I’m incredibly happy here, I still have the desire to do well.” He knows City can improve but was content enough with a win more straightforward than the scoreline might suggest. “Sheffield United had one chance in 90 minutes,” added Guardiola. “But although we played really well in the first half and created a lot of chances we struggled to score. We are not clinical enough in the finally third.” With Wilder’s obdurate back five retreating ever deeper, it was not easy. City constructed increasingly geometrically ambitious passing manoeuvres and, as heavy rain fell in contrastingly straight lines it seemed a minor miracle that Aaron Ramsdale did not pick the ball out of his net until the 28th minute. The goal involved football’s immutable law of the ex as Kyle Walker scored against his hometown club at the ground where he began his career. Yet good as the full-back’s crisply arrowed drive from outside the area was, Walker could not have done it without assistance from Raheem Sterling and Kevin De Bruyne. Sterling shone throughout and was already tormenting George Baldock and Chris Basham. Appropriately enough it was his counterattacking dribble which prefaced De Bruyne’s perfectly calibrated, goal creating, cross-field pass the fallout of which would leave Walker responding in suitably muted fashion. “My mum and dad still live in Sheffield,” he said afterwards. “I’d have got so much stick if I’d celebrated.” While Ferran Torres’s penalty area sharpness saw Guardiola’s young Spaniard have a glancing header palmed away by Ramsdale and a first-time volley blocked, United’s Rhian Brewster lacked a similarly supportive attacking framework within which to showcase his own finishing skills. Considering that, before kick-off, Alan Shearer said he thought even he would have struggled to score regularly in Wilder’s side, Brewster’s apparent lack of impact must be judged in context. Significantly, his attacking partner, Oli McBurnie’s, principal contribution was an early, clattering, shoulder charge on Ruben Dias which left the City defender briefly crumpled in agony. Relations between Wilder and John Lundstram, so important last season, appear to have deteriorated following the midfielder’s rejection of a new contract but recognising the need for change the home manager finally liberated him from the bench and United improved a little. Despite the ever more influential De Bruyne dragging a shot inches wide and Ramsdale getting a goal preventing hand to Riyad Mahrez’s wall confounding free-kick, City’s earlier dynamism had faded slightly. Although Ederson remained embarrassingly underworked, United were no longer ceding almost 80% of possession. Recognising the danger, Guardiola prowled his technical area in agitated mode, almost imploding when Sander Berge nutmegged Cancelo before cutting back superbly for Lundstram to undo everything by lashing the most inviting of openings off target. By now a weak winter sun had replaced the rain but only Guardiola detected a rainbow. “City moved us around the pitch,” said Wilder. “I’m disappointed we didn’t do more to put them on the back foot but you have to show you deserve to play at this level.”