Boris Johnson and the European commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, will speak on Saturday afternoon for the first time since June, it has been announced, in an eleventh-hour attempt to find common ground on a trade and security deal. After the latest and last scheduled round of negotiations in Brussels, a Downing Street spokesman said the prime minister would “take stock of negotiations and discuss next steps” with the commission president. After their last meeting, Johnson had declared it time to put a “tiger in the tank” of the negotiations. The prime minister had insisted it was even possible to strike a deal before the summer was out. Three months have since passed and while EU sources said the last week of talks between the teams led by UK’s chief negotiator, David Frost, and his EU counterpart, Michel Barnier, had made some progress, a major breakthrough is yet to be made. “There are no landing zones in sight yet”, said one source. The internal market bill aims to enforce compatible rules and regulations regarding trade in England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Some rules, for example around food safety or air quality,  which were formerly set by EU agreements, will now be controlled by the devolved administrations or Westminster. The internal market bill insists that devolved administrations  have to accept goods and services from all the nations of the UK – even if their standards differ locally. This, says the government, is in part to ensure international traders have access to the UK as a whole, confident that standards and rules are consistent. The Scottish government has criticised it as a Westminster "power grab", and the Welsh government has expressed fears it will lead to a race to the bottom. If one of the countries that makes up the UK lowers their standards, over the importation of chlorinated chicken, for example, the other three nations will have to accept chlorinated chicken too. It has become even more controversial because one of its main aims is to empower ministers to pass regulations even if they are contrary to the withdrawal agreement reached with the EU under the Northern Ireland protocol. The text does not disguise its intention, stating that powers contained in the bill “have effect notwithstanding any relevant international or domestic law with which they may be incompatible or inconsistent". The bill passed its first hurdle in parliament by 77 votes, despite a rebellion by some Tory MPs. Martin Belam and Owen Bowcott The conversation between Johnson and Von der Leyen, a former German defence minister, is nevertheless seen as a positive move in Brussels, providing a gateway to further rounds of negotiation. It is expected the two sides will continue in talks over the next two weeks with an EU summit on 15 October looming as a key moment. Johnson had suggested last month the UK could walk away from the talks to concentrate on no-deal preparations should there be no agreement by mid-October. Brussels had also hoped to have a deal in place by the time of the summit. EU sources suggested the timetable for a deal was slipping but that it would be unthinkable for either side to end the negotiation this month if there was hope that an agreement could be secured. Barnier is due to meet the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, on Monday in Berlin to plot out the next few weeks. Officials in Brussels suggested the much-discussed “tunnel” of intensive negotiations, where the two sides get creative away from the glare of media scrutiny and the involvement of the EU capitals, may have to wait until the end of this month with a deal potentially being secured in early November. The first or second week of November is being seen as the real deadline for agreement given the need to find time time for ratification by the European parliament and in Westminster. The most contentious issues in the talks remain that of control of domestic subsidies or state aid, to ensure a so-called ‘level playing field’ for EU-UK businesses, and access for European fishing fleets to British waters. Ahead of this week’s talks, five new draft negotiating documents were submitted by the government, including legal texts on fisheries, the “level playing field”, law enforcement and judicial cooperation, civil nuclear cooperation and social security coordination. The Guardian revealed on Wednesday that Britain had offered a three-year transition period for European fishing fleets to allow them to prepare for the post-Brexit changes as part of an 11th-hour deal sweetener. The catches of EU fishermen would be “phased down” between 2021 and 2024 to offer time for European coastal communities to adapt to the changes. On state aid, EU sources said the UK had offered to lay out a series of “principles” on controlling domestic subsidies. The EU said the paper offered hope that the UK would build on provisions in the recently signed UK-Japan deal. The trade deal with Tokyo prevents either side from indefinitely guaranteeing the debts of struggling companies or providing open-ended bailouts without approved restructuring plans. But the paper failed to offer appropriate “governance” proposals that would allow Brussels to keep the UK to its pledges, EU sources said. 