John Lanchester’s first collection of short stories begins with a lesson in etiquette. “You aren’t allowed to ask for the Wi-Fi password before you say hello,” says the narrator to his nine year old son. “It’s simply one of the rules.” Reality, and Other Stories is a collection of eight contemporary ghost stories, with the horror stemming from the irresistible power that technology has over us. In real life we are obsessed, distracted, impolite, floating through a world of unravelling human bonds and never-ending notifications. Could fiction be worse? The opening story follows a family as they visit a wealthy friend’s country estate for a New Year party where there is a video games room, there are iPads, Disney+ – everything they need to keep the children occupied. Spoiling the party is a very tall, unhappy-looking man who never looks up from his phone. He takes a special interest in the children; is always there when the parents aren’t. But when the parents ask about him, no one else in the house has seen him. It’s a cautionary tale that bubbles first with humour then panic, and ends in melancholy. In “Reality” a young woman wakes up in a strange house. It is Day One of a new reality television show. The house is beautiful and the people are too – or so it seems. Of all the stories, this is the most affecting. The participants chirp compliments (“Love the outfit!”), but are mocked by the echoes of their own voices – they sound false. It’s all for show; nothing is real. They soon turn on one another. There are no ghouls or ghosts, but a horrible sense of souls in torment. The stories are uneasy rather than frightening, in the manner of MR James. In fact, “Coffin Liquor” – in which a snobbish academic has his Great Expectations audiobook ruined by a malevolent spirit – is a fine tribute to the master. Lanchester is more barbed: those most likely to be haunted are smug academics and people who say “no worries”. He is also socially alert; the tensions and disconnections of modern families are nicely illuminated. Lanchester conjures a sad shadow world all the more scary for being a mirror image of our own. These entertainments are brisk, vinegar-sharp satires that horrify and amuse in equal measure; an alarming reality check. Like a lesson in etiquette, it’s good medicine. • Reality, and Other Stories is published by Faber (£12.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.