A parody Twitter account styled to represent the government of Kazakhstan but apparently in promotion of the forthcoming Borat sequel, has praised Donald Trump’s performance in the recent US presidential debate. “Congratulation to great friend of the Kazakh people @realDonaldTrump for winning debate today!” it read. “Impressive and amazing result for a strong premier who always put America and Kazakhstan first!” Congratulation to great friend of the Kazakh people @realDonaldTrump for winning debate today! Impressive and amazing result for a strong premier who always put America and Kazakhstan first! pic.twitter.com/qLljQ8b5UU An accompanying video, voiced by Sacha Baron Cohen’s Borat, offers a preview of the new film – released on Amazon on 23 October, two weeks before the election. Statements by Borat about Trump’s competence and supremacy play over apparently contradictory news footage. “He not racist,” says Borat, over clips of NFL players taking the knee, “black guys love him so much they kneel before him.” Other aspects of Trump’s track record up for discussion appear to be his treatment of women, his military record, his health (“Never had stroke,” says Borat, over clips of Trump struggling with stairs or a bottle of water) and his handling of the Covid pandemic. “Because of Trump, 350 million Americans still alive,” says Borat, before concluding: “Vote for Premier Trump or you will be crushed.” The account began tweeting on 27 September, mostly with apparent weather updates and previews of mundane governmental business. But a change in tone was noted during the debate, as the account chronicled connection problems before “using wi-fi of neighbouring assholes Uzbekistan! Watching debate again!” Apologies. We are unable to currently follow debate because of poor WiFi signal despite recent govermment purchase of broadband account. Please inform us of developments! #debates2020 During the debate, the account also “fact-checked” Joe Biden’s claims for the efficacy of face coverings in stopping the spread of coronavirus, saying that the “urine therapy” pioneered by Trump was the “only proven facial protection”. Overnight, Baron Cohen also tweeted a film poster featuring Borat using a face mask as a mankini on what appears to be a nod to the infamous garment worn to promote the first film in Cannes. Jagshemash my name Borat Sagdiyev, I like mouth party. Thank you Mr. Sacha Karen Cohen for let me usings your visual fax machine. Please you will look on this space tomorrow at 8.07pm Kazakhstan Time. Chenquieh pic.twitter.com/akdvw7vlTJ