The former Daily Telegraph editor Charles Moore has ruled himself out of contention for the role of BBC chairman. Moore, whose writings on race and Islam have come under renewed scrutiny since he was publicly associated with the role, is understood to have backed away amid family health problems despite claims he was Downing Street’s top choice for the position. The arch-critic of the BBC was suggested as a contender for the part-time job, which is appointed by the government and comes with the power to fire the director general. David Clementi, the current chairman, is due to step down when his term in office ends in February, after overseeing the appointment of Tim Davie as the new director general. The Sunday Times, which last weekend quoted a government source saying Moore’s appointment was “virtually a done deal”, reported he had decided not to seek the role for personal reasons. The newspaper also claimed Moore, who was once fined for refusing to pay his television licence fee in protest at the BBC’s content, would have wanted substantially more than the current £100,000 licence fee-funded salary. Despite strong speculation linking Moore to the job, government sources have consistently emphasised that the formal recruitment process for the position has yet to begin. But the government has made no secret of its desire to challenge the BBC, and if the prime minister wanted to force through a particular candidate for the job then he would likely be able to do so. Another Fleet Street heavyweight, Paul Dacre, the former editor of the Daily Mail, has been suggested as a preferred pick of the prime minister to be chairman of Ofcom, overseeing the board of the communications regulator. A similar open competition process needs to be held for that role, but there is little to stop a preferred candidate being forced on to the organisation. The speculation about Moore raised concern within the BBC about the direction that he would seek to take the corporation. Julian Knight, the Conservative MP who chairs the culture select committee, said appointing a man who refused to pay a licence fee as BBC chairman was “like being convicted of fraud and being in a bank”. Moore’s past writings also caused concern. In a 1992 article in the Spectator, Moore wrote: “The Korean sets up the grocery store which the black then robs: that is the caricature which modern America recognises. Why has this happened then? One explanation, made endlessly in conversation and hardly ever in print, is that there really is something different about blacks, or at least about black men, or at least about young black men.” He went on to say that people in the UK and US “detect in black youths an aggression and defiance and indifference to normal moral and social constraints which frighten them […] If it is true, as it surely is that some races – the Jews are the obvious example – are highly enterprising and talented, it may also be true that some are the opposite.” The coverage also served as a warning to Davie about what actions the government is willing to consider. There is expectation that ministers will soon announce the decriminalisation of non-payment of the licence fee, in what could be a blow to the BBC’s income. Davie has already promised to emphasise impartiality in the BBC’s news output – a bugbear of Conservative ministers who perceive that the corporation’s journalism skews to the left. He has also committed to providing material for audiences across the whole of the UK, signalling less London-centric programming and a less explicit attempt to chase younger audiences – policies that fit with the aims of the Conservative government.