Bristol are into the Premiership play-offs for the first time in 13 years after a frantic final five minutes to their scrappy victory over London Irish saw Pat Lam’s side book their semi-final spot. A penalty try with four minutes remaining sealed the bonus point for Bristol and when Saracens pulled level with Bath just seconds later, the Bears moved into third place in the table, above their West Country rivals. Both results mean that even if Sale’s postponed match against Worcester goes ahead on Wednesday, and even if the Sharks manage a bonus-point victory, Bristol are still assured of a semi-final next week with Bath now facing an anxious wait. As things stand, the Bears face a trip to Wasps on Saturday but if Sale do claim five points on Wednesday they will go third with Bristol dropping to fourth and making the journey to Exeter. “We are all involved indirectly. We know we’re in regardless, but as it stands we’re going to Wasps but have to wait and see,” Lam said. “A lot of planning and preparation goes in. I’ll get on the bus now and prepare for that game.” Given the Sale fiasco, Bristol arrived here knowing that a bonus-point win was needed to at least put pressure on the Sharks. They started brightly enough, with a fine try from Semi Radradra after 13 minutes but some resolute defence from Irish and the increasingly poor conditions saw frustration kick in among the Bristol side. We have become accustomed to their poise and panache this season but ultimately it was their power, and an added dose of panic, that eventually saw them through. Bristol dominated in terms of possession and territory for large spells of both halves but found the Irish defence a tough nut to crack. They managed two tries in the first half and really ought to have had a third – Max Malins inexplicably spilling the ball when over the try line. Bristol had advantage at the time but took the questionable decision to kick for goal – Malins on target with the penalty when going for the try was surely the wiser option. With Radradra’s try already in the bank, the Bears finally made an attacking lineout count with Ben Earl going over from the back of the drive for his 12th try of the season. Malins’s dreadful error a few minutes before half-time seemed to spread some anxiety through the ranks, however. They led 17-0 at half-time but the third quarter was one of frustration for Lam’s side and it was no surprise when Ollie Hassell-Collins scored a superb solo try, dashing through the heart of the Bristol defence to compound the visitors’ problems. With 13 minutes to go, another kick to the corner yielded the third try after Lam had summoned a number of senior players off the bench with Harry Thacker going over at the back of another lineout drive. Chances came and went for Bristol before finally, with 76 minutes on the clock, Karl Dickson awarded a penalty try from another lineout drive, to Lam’s huge relief. Will Capon added another from close range for good measure in the final minute.