“They’re digging up the woods.” With these ominous words, an old acquaintance detonates Nathan’s previously unremarkable life. Russell Tovey stars in this bleak drama, stripped across the week (episodes air daily until Thursday), dealing with the lingering fallout of a party that got out of hand. At this stage, it could go either way: there’s the beginnings of a sketchy supernatural subplot that will need to be handled carefully. But it is satisfyingly enigmatic and Tovey’s understated intensity is as watchable as ever. Phil Harrison How’s this for lovely? Gavin & Stacey’s Nessa, Ruth Jones, discovers her grandad was a leading figure in a forerunner of the NHS called the Medical Aid Societies of South Wales. He even ended up lobbying a certain fellow Welshman by the name of Aneurin Bevan. As Ruth says: “Good on you, grandfather!” Ali Catterall Franklin D Roosevelt addressed the US via radio broadcasts known as “fireside chats”. It’s doubtful that many Americans have taken similar succour from the tweets of Donald Trump, but this documentary tracks Trump’s White House years via his prolific social media output. PH Mining guilty schadenfreude about watching gilded lives fall apart, this drama from David E Kelley is built around fine performances from Nicole Kidman and Hugh Grant. Kidman is Grace Fraser, a successful therapist – until scandal intervenes. Grant (charming and shifty) is her husband. PH The intriguingly dark, frequently tongue-in-cheek pornography drama – which stars I, Daniel Blake’s Hayley Squires as a leading adult entrepreneur – reaches its final episode. The disgraced MP Stella fights for Jolene in her defamation case, while Amy is forced to quit the industry. Smart, sharp and original. Hannah J Davies How did a cartoon frog become a hate symbol? The answer is complex and deceptively simple, but boils down to “the internet”. In this fascinating documentary, Pepe’s creator, Matt Furie, attempts to reclaim his character – but, in a fast-moving culture, he has his work cut out. PH A Quiet Place (John Krasinski, 2018) 9pm, Film4Suspenseful thriller set in a post-apocalyptic world where ferocious, blind creatures hunt humans – who are safe, so long as they remain silent. The director, John Krasinski, also stars as Lee Abbott, whose family are practised survivalists, but mum Evelyn (Emily Blunt) is pregnant; how do you give birth silently? Paul Howlett IPL cricket: Kolkata Knight Riders v Kings XI Punjab 1.50pm, Sky Sports Cricket. From Sharjah Cricket Stadium. Premier League football: Burnley v Tottenham Hotspur 7pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Action from Turf Moor. NFL: Los Angeles Rams v Chicago Bears Midnight, Channel 5; Sky Sports Main Event. From SoFi Stadium.