Ahead of Wednesday’s vice-presidential debate, the buzz was around whether Kamala Harris or Mike Pence would turn in a standout performance. Instead, the unexpected star of the show was a fly, which landed on Pence’s head and sat there, seemingly carefree, for a full two minutes. Total time a fly sat on Mike Pence's head: two minutes pic.twitter.com/PtI0rKSi5I My debate ranking:1. Senator Harris.2. The fly.3. Vice President Pence. who will land the interview with the fly? the ride time was amazing. https://t.co/ezp0R9bRH9 The unnamed fly prompted much commentary online, and the word “flies” began trending on Twitter. Some pointed out that flies, according to conventional wisdom, are drawn to feces. A fly landing on Pence’s head while he’s saying “systemic racism isn’t real” is the universe’s way of saying “this is bullshit.” pic.twitter.com/25dBH2t5zr EWWWWWWWWW that fly has Mike Pence on his stomach. #VPDebate It wasn’t long before the fly had its own Twitter account – Mike Pence’s Fly. During her debate prep Harris and her team were aware of the double standard women in power are subjected to compared with men – including increased scrutiny over how women look. But it was Pence’s appearance which drew more attention. Setting aside the issue of the vice-president having a fly on his head, people also pointed to the condition of his left eye. Numerous viewers spotted that Pence’s left eye had a distinctly pinky-red tone, prompting widespread discussion about pink eye. Is he ok? pic.twitter.com/77qDCYdFGr #FAKENEWS he was terrible and amazingly stiff and fake. And looked sick with the pink eye AND the fly was attracted to sh*t. https://t.co/sxvaqGywfT Pink eye, or conjunctivitis, can be a symptom of coronavirus. Pence tested negative for Covid-19 ahead of the debate – dozens of Donald Trump’s other contacts were not so lucky. With commendable speed, the Biden-Harris campaign seized on the fly issue: Biden tweeted a fly-related fundraising ask (“Pitch in $5 to help this campaign fly”), and “flywillvote.com” which redirected to a website where Americans can register to vote. Pitch in $5 to help this campaign fly. https://t.co/CqHAId0j8t pic.twitter.com/NbkPl0a8HV https://t.co/TtWm3i4eaq.