In the run-up to Halloween, you’ll see a lot of impractical makeup options. While I accept pragmatism isn’t at the top of Halloween’s cosmetic agenda, if you’d rather something less terrifying, try Rodarte’s AW20 look. The trick is to juxtapose brooding lips with a glowy – not ghostly – face. Mimic skin by mixing in a bit of foundation with moisturiser. Apply subtle hints of highlighter to your cheekbones, add a dark eyeliner and finish off with a moody lip. 1. Dior Rouge Dior Ultra Rouge Lipstick £30, dior.com 2. Dolce & Gabbana Passion Lips Lipstick £36, harrods.com 3. Laura Mercier Caviar Intense Ink Waterproof Liquid Eyeliner £22, feelunique.com 4. Westman Atelier Super Loaded Highlight £69, net-a-porter.com 5. Guerlain Rouge G de Guerlain Lipstick £26, guerlain.com Long before single-ingredient products became fashionable, Indeed Laboratories was there, quietly getting on with it producing clever formulations at great prices. As someone who grew up battling skin issues, I have always had a soft spot for efficacious, targeted skincare brands that are not financially prohibitive. The basis of good skincare is a decent cleanser, but even the very best shouldn’t cost you three figures – so if yours does, you are wasting your money. Especially when you have this. Now, a lot of cream cleansers irk me because I find they don’t clean well enough and they leave a residue on the skin. This one, however, has a myriad of characteristics I could champion all day long. The formula is made up of hyaluronic acid (hence the name) thereby enhancing moisture in the skin. It also includes a resurfacer and exfoliant that is gentle but powerful (clinically proven to brighten skin in 14 days) and grapeseed oil, which is a non-clogging source of antioxidants that also helps to reduce hyperpigmentation. The texture – a thick cream that lathers, but not too much – cleans like a gel counterpart. Like really cleans, but not in a way that leaves my skin feeling tight. Instead, my skin feels completely balanced. Which means on the days I am feeling particularly lazy I can skip my toner and go straight to moisturising. Always a winner in my book. Indeed Laboratories Hydraluron Cream Cleanser, £19.99, boots.com Salt of the earth Using avocado oil and sustainably sourced mineral salts from the Dead Sea and Kalahari desert, these bath salts create a relaxing soak, replenishing moisture and soothing aching muscles. Olverum Bath Salts, £37, spacenk.com Called to the bar I’m obsessed with this body-exfoliating bar. It has orange blossom and neroli, as well as bamboo powder for dead skin, and sunflower seed and aloe vera to lock in moisture. Glossier Body Hero Exfoliating Bar, £12, glossier.com Cream de la cream This thick luxe body cream – infused with soothing saffron flowers and moisturising shea butter and babassu – is excellent for dry skin. Feel the silkiness. Sisley Velvet Nourishing Body Cream, £102, sisley-paris.co.uk Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto