Gareth Southgate said his young England side showed they are capable of matching the best in the world after they moved top of their Nations League group thanks to a resilient 2-1 win against Belgium. Belgium controlled much of the first half, showing why they are top of the world rankings, and led after an early penalty from Romelu Lukaku. “I think it was a really high-level game,” Southgate said. “We got caught with a few counterattacks and that sort of unhinged us. They caused us problems down the sides but we resolved those issues. It was a huge test to come through that and stay in the game.” England rallied after the tricky start and had a chance to level when Jordan Henderson won a penalty after making the most of minimal contact from Thomas Meunier at a corner. Marcus Rashford equalised from the spot. Southgate said: “The penalty came at a critical moment and meant we could go in at half-time when we needed to regroup.” England earned the points thanks to Mason Mount’s deflected winner in the 65th minute. “In the second half the way they used the ball showed composure,” Southgate said. “They defended as a team and in these games you have to. Bar the one incredible pass Kevin De Bruyne hit in the second half, every time one man got beaten there was someone else to clear up. “I was proud of what they did. When you think the front players, plus Declan [Rice] and Trent [Alexander‑Arnold], are so young, to go and win should give them a sense of what might be possible over the next few years.” Henderson joked about the penalty incident with Meunier but insisted he did not go down easily. “He wasn’t sure it was a penalty but I was pretty sure it was,” the midfielder said. “I was in front of him and he pulled back on my shoulder. After that we grew in confidence in the game, after speaking about a couple of things tactically at half-time.” England started without Kane because the striker had felt muscle tightness during training, while a weary Henderson had to be substituted. Kane replaced Dominic Calvert-Lewin in the second half and Southgate is confident his captain will play against Denmark at Wembley on Wednesday. “We’re hoping Harry will progress. With Jordan it’s a little more complicated. We’re going to have to assess him,” Southgate said. Ben Chilwell could be involved, having missed the Belgium game because of illness.