Details of a new three-tier lockdown system for England have been announced by Boris Johnson in an effort to tackle the rising number of Covid-19 infections. The traffic-light-style plan – or “local Covid alert levels” as the prime minister put it – is designed to simplify the current patchwork of localised restrictions that apply to about a quarter of the UK. England will be split up into three tiers of medium, high and very high alert areas, with the most severe restrictions on social contact and businesses coming in the last category. Here’s what we know so far about the three-tier system, with the caveat that there is likely to be a certain amount of autonomy devolved to local authorities, with the result that two areas in the same tier may have slightly different restrictions. Some 28% of England’s population are in tier 2, while 3% are in tier 3, which will apply from Wednesday to the Liverpool city region. This includes the local authority districts of Halton, Knowsley, Sefton, St Helens and Wirral, as well as the City of Liverpool. Elsewhere in the north of England, all the councils currently under enhanced coronavirus regulations will fall into the new Tier 2 “high” alert level. They will be joined by other areas, including Sheffield, Doncaster, Rotherham and Barnsley, in South Yorkshire. Nottinghamshire, along with East and West Cheshire, will also move into Tier 2 as a result of rising infection rates. Areas of the Midlands that will fall into the same category include Birmingham, Sandwell, Solihull, Walsall and Wolverhampton. Newcastle, South Tyneside, North Tyneside, Gateshead, Sunderland, Durham and Northumberland are among the affected areas in the north-east, alongside parts of Tees Valley including Middlesbrough and Hartlepool. The gov.uk website will feature a postcode checker so that people can check the regulations in their area, with the information also available via the Covid-19 app. Shops, schools and universities remain open in all categories, while residents of tier 1 (medium) areas can expect restrictions to mirror the current national measures in place including the “rule of six”, which permits no more than six people from multiple households to gather indoors or outdoors. Organised sport will be allowed only outdoors, while wedding and civil partnership ceremonies can have up to 15 attendees. The screws tighten in tier 2, which Johnson said would reflect already existing interventions in many areas. He said it “primarily aims to reduce household-to-household transmission” by preventing all mixing indoors between different households or “support bubbles”. Outdoor meetings can happen, but will still be subject to the rule of six. However, the rules will be more relaxed than previously in some areas, where mixing of households in gardens was previously not allowed. Everything will be law now rather than simply advice. People are likely to be advised to only visit care homes in exceptional circumstances, but can go on holiday outside their area. In tier 3 areas, the government will set “a baseline” of prohibiting mixing in private dwellings, both indoors and in gardens. Residents in this level would also be advised against travel in and out of the area, unless it was needed, for example to take children to school. Wedding receptions are banned in the Liverpool City region, while people should avoid staying overnight in another part of the UK if they are resident in that area. Government guidance also states that people should avoid staying overnight in the Liverpool City region if they are resident elsewhere. In tier 1 areas, sectors that are open will be permitted to continue to do so as long as they meet Covid-19 secure guidance. Face coverings and/or screens for all workers in indoor hospitality, and customers apart from when seated, will be mandatory, while the 10pm curfew on pubs will remain. People will be advised to continue working from home where possible. In the tier 2 category, bars and pubs will be allowed to remain open but in tier 3 they will have to close down unless they are serving food. Guidelines are expected to lay out what constitutes that food, ruling out venues getting around a shutdown by serving token snacks alongside alcohol. New restrictions in the Liverpool City region will also include the closure of indoor gyms and fitness/dance studios, along with sports facilities, leisure centres, betting shops, adult gaming centres and casinos. The tier system will reportedly be based on the local rate of infection, although the rate of increase might also be taken into account, along with the total number of cases. Johnson said that areas in tier 3 will be those where infection rates are rising rapidly and “where the NHS could soon be under unbearable pressure”. Various reports suggest the infection rate for tier 1, which would have the fewest restrictions, could be less than 100 cases per 100,000 people of the population. Reviews are expected to be carried out every few weeks. When asked what needs to happen for local restrictions to be lifted, Boris Johnson said the R number [the average number of people an infected person will pass the disease on to] would have to fall below 1.